=head1 NAME

B<wt2db> - utility to convert WikiText documents into DocBook XML/SGML.

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<wt2db> [I<OPTION>] [I<FILE>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<wt2db> converts a text file in a special format similar to that used
in WikiWikiWebs into DocBook XML/SGML.

The DocBook it writes out is only
a fragment, not a complete document, because it has no DOCTYPE declaration.
And due to the source format, there is no meta-data, such as in an
<articleinfo> structure.

As part of a larger publishing or document processing system, it is
expected that later processing will supply these elements.

By default it reads from STDIN and writes to STDOUT. However, if given a
filename, it will read that file, and an output filename can also be
specified as a command-line option.

=head1 OPTIONS

B<-o>, B<--output-to> I<filename> write to the specified file.

B<-v>, B<--verbose> show diagnostic output.

B<-h>, B<--help> show a usage message.

=head1 BUGS

Bugs are tracked in the SourceForge project page at:

http://www.sourceforge.net/projects/linuxdoc

If you report a bug in B<wt2db>, specify wt2db as the category so it will
be routed the appropriate person.

=head1 RESTRICTIONS

Currently only a single form of WikiText is supported, which is very
similar to that used by the Wikipedia (see http://www.wikipedia.com).
A future release will be configurable to support additional styles of
WikiText.

=head1 NOTES

B<wt2db> was developed as a project of the Linux Documentation Project
to create an easier way of writing DocBook documentation. While it is
useful on its own, it is part of Lampadas, the LDP's document
production system.

=head1 SEE ALSO

See the home page of the Linux Documentation Project,
http://www.tldp.org for updates and more information.

=head1 AUTHOR

This man page was written by David C. Merrill <david@lupercalia.net>.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under
the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1 or any later
version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no Invariant Sections,
no Front-Cover Texts and no Back-Cover Texts.

=cut

