{]}\textgreater{}

Your title

\begin{verbatim}
<subtitle>An optional subtitle</subtitle>
\end{verbatim}

 Your given name Your last name Your organization

\begin{verbatim}
  <email>you@your.domain</email>
  </address>
</affiliation>
\end{verbatim}

Optional version information

 Add as many keywords as you want .

Introduction

Why was this document written?

Some explanations.

Audience

Explain for whom it has been written.

New versions of this doc

Point to the latest version of this document.

Revision History

 1.2 2003-02-28 MG More stuff you changed. 1.1 2003-01-22 MG Stuff you
changed. 1.0 2002-12-29 MG Initial release for TLDP

Contributions

Thank people who helped realizing this doc.

Feedback

Missing information, missing links, missing characters? Mail it to the
maintainer of this document:

you@your.domain

Copyright information

Copyright 2002 Your\_first\_name Your\_last\_name.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts and no Back-Cover Texts. A
copy of the license is included in entitled GNU Free Documentation
License.

Read The GNU Manifesto if you want to know why this license was chosen
for this book.

The author and publisher have made every effort in the preparation of
this book to ensure the accuracy of the information. However, the
information contained in this book is offered without warranty, either
express or implied. Neither the author nor the publisher nor any dealer
or distributor will be held liable for any damages caused or alleged to
be caused either directly or indirectly by this book.

The logos, trademarks and symbols used in this book are the properties
of their respective owners.

What do you need?

List requirements: materials, knowledge.

Conventions used in this document

The following typographic and usage conventions occur in this text:

Typographic and usage conventions

Text typeMeaning

 Quoted text Quotes from people, quoted computer output.

terminal view

 Literal computer input and output captured from the terminal, usually
rendered with a light grey background. command Name of a command that
can be entered on the command line. VARIABLE Name of a variable or
pointer to content of a variable, as in \$VARNAME. option Option to a
command, as in the -a option to the ls command. argument Argument to a
command, as in read man ls.

command options arguments

 Command synopsis or general usage, on a separated line. filename Name
of a file or directory, for example Change to the /usr/bin directory.
Key Keys to hit on the keyboard, such as type Q to quit. Button
Graphical button to click, like the OK button. MenuChoice Choice to
select from a graphical menu, for instance: Select HelpAbout Mozilla in
your browser. Terminology Important term or concept: The Linux kernel is
the heart of the system. See link to related subject within this guide.
The author Clickable link to an external web resource.

Organization of this document

List chapters (and optionally, appendices) with a short content for each
(only for longer docs).

: short description.

: short description.

: short description.

: short description.

: short description.

\&chap1; \&chap2; \&app1; \&gloss; 
