#LyX 1.2 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 220
\textclass docbook-book
\begin_preamble
<!entity header system "header.sgml">
\end_preamble
\language english
\inputencoding default
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 0
\use_amsmath 0
\use_natbib 0
\use_numerical_citations 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language swedish
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Title
\added_space_top vfill \added_space_bottom vfill 
Linux IPv6 HOWTO
\layout SGML

<author> 
\layout FirstName

Peter 
\layout Surname

Bieringer
\layout SGML

<affiliation><address> <email>pb (at) bieringer.de</email> </address> </affiliati
on> 
\layout SGML

</author>
\layout SGML

<revhistory> 
\layout SGML

<revision> <revnumber>Release 0.32</revnumber> <date>2002-11-03</date> <authorini
tials>PB</authorinitials> <revremark>See  
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref[revision history]{revision-history}

\end_inset 

 for more</revremark></revision>
\layout SGML

<revision> <revnumber>Release 0.31</revnumber> <date>2002-09-29</date> <authorini
tials>PB</authorinitials> <revremark>See  
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref[revision history]{revision-history}

\end_inset 

 for more</revremark></revision>
\layout SGML

<revision> <revnumber>Release 0.30</revnumber> <date>2002-09-27</date> <authorini
tials>PB</authorinitials> <revremark>See  
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref[revision history]{revision-history}

\end_inset 

 for more</revremark></revision>
\layout SGML

</revhistory> 
\layout Abstract

The goal of the Linux IPv6 HOWTO is to answer both basic and advanced questions
 about IPv6 on the Linux operating system.
 This HOWTO will provide the reader with enough information to install,
 configure, and use IPv6 applications on Linux machines.
\layout Chapter


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{chapter-general}

\end_inset 

General
\layout Comment

CVS-ID: $Id$
\layout Standard

Information about available translations you will find in section 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref[Translations]{general-translations}

\end_inset 

.
\layout Section


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{general-copright}

\end_inset 

Copyright, license and others
\layout Subsection

Copyright
\layout Standard

Written and Copyright (C) 2001-2002 by Peter Bieringer
\layout Subsection

License
\layout Standard


\series bold 
This Linux IPv6 HOWTO is published under GNU GPL version 2
\series default 
:
\newline 

\newline 

\newline 

\newline 

\layout Standard

The Linux IPv6 HOWTO, a guide how to configure and use IPv6 on Linux systems.
 
\newline 

\layout Standard

Copyright (C) 2001-2002 Peter Bieringer 
\newline 

\layout Standard

This documentation is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
 it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the
 Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your
 option) any later version.
 
\layout Standard

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
 ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS
 FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
 See the GNU General Public License for more details.
 
\layout Standard

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
 with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
 59 Temple Place - Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.
\layout Subsection

About the author
\layout Subsubsection

Internet/IPv6 history of the author
\layout Itemize

1993: I got in contact with the Internet using console based e-mail and
 news client (e.g.
 look for 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

e91abier
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 on 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[groups.google.com]{http://groups.google.com/}

\end_inset 

, that's me).
\layout Itemize

1996: I got a request for designing a course on IPv6, including a workshop
 with the Linux operating system.
\layout Itemize

1997: Started writing a guide on how to install, configure and use IPv6
 on Linux systems, called 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPv6 & Linux - HowTo]{http://www.bieringer.de/linux/IPv6/}

\end_inset 

 (see 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPv6 & Linux - HowTo/History]{http://www.bieringer.de/linux/IPv6/IPv6-HOWTO/IPv6-HOWTO-0.html#history}

\end_inset 

 for more information).
\layout Itemize

2001: Started writing this new Linux IPv6 HOWTO.
 
\layout Subsubsection

Contact
\layout Standard

The author can be contacted via e-mail at <pb at bieringer dot de> and also
 via his 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[homepage]{http://www.bieringer.de/pb/}

\end_inset 

.
\layout Standard

He's currently living in Munich [northern part of Schwabing] / Bavaria /
 Germany (south) / Europe (middle) / Earth (surface/mainland).
\layout Section


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{general-category}

\end_inset 

Category
\layout Standard

This HOWTO should be listed in category 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 


\emph on 
Networking
\emph default 
/
\emph on 
Protocols
\emph default 

\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

.
\layout Section

Version, History and To-Do
\layout Subsection

Version
\layout Standard

The current version is shown above.
\layout Subsection

History
\layout Subsubsection

Major history
\layout Standard

2001-11-30: Starting to design new HOWTO.
\layout Standard

2002-01-02: A lot of content completed, first public release of chapter
 1 (version 0.10).
\layout Standard

2002-01-14: More completed, some reviews, public release of the whole document
 (version 0.14).
\layout Standard

2002-08-16: Polish translation is in progress
\layout Standard

2002-10-31: Chinese translation is available (see 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref[Translations]{general-translations}

\end_inset 

 for more)
\layout Subsubsection

Full history
\layout Standard

See 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref[revision history]{revision-history}

\end_inset 

 at the end of this document.
\layout Subsection

To-Do
\layout Itemize

Fill in missing content
\layout Itemize

Finishing grammar checking
\layout Section


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{general-translations}

\end_inset 

Translations
\layout Standard

Translations always have to contain the URL, version number and copyright
 of the original document (but yours, too).
\layout Subsection

To German
\layout Standard

A German translation is planned by me (German is my native language), but
 it won't happen until the document's change frequency is less than once
 per month, and I get enough free time to do it (which is currently very
 improbably).
 If you have more free time than me, please feel free to take over the translati
on!
\layout Subsection

To other languages
\layout Standard

Normally, please wait until the document's change frequency is less than
 once per month.
 Since version 0.27 it looks like that most of the content is written.
\layout Subsubsection

Chinese
\layout Standard

A Chinese translation by Burma Chen <expns at yahoo dot com> (announced
 to me at 2002-10-31) can be found on the CLDP: 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[http://www.linux.org.tw/CLDP/Linux-IPv6-HOWTO.html]{http://www.linux.org.tw/CLDP/Linux-IPv6-HOWTO.html}

\end_inset 


\layout Subsubsection

Polish
\layout Standard

Since 2002-08-16 a Polish translation was started and is still in progress
 by Lukasz Jokiel <Lukasz dot Jokiel at klonex dot com dot pl>.
 Taken source: CVS-version 1.29 of LyX file, which was source for howto version
 0.27.
\layout Section

Technical
\layout Subsection


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{general-original-source}

\end_inset 

Original source of this HOWTO
\layout Standard

This HOWTO is currently written with LyX version 1.2.0 on a Red Hat Linux
 7.3 system with template SGML (DocBook book).
 It's available on 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[TLDP-CVS / users / Peter-Bieringer]{http://cvsview.tldp.org/index.cgi/LDP/users/Peter-Bieringer/}

\end_inset 

 for contribution.
\layout Subsubsection

Code line wrapping
\layout Standard

Code line wrapping is done using selfmade utility 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

lyxcodelinewrapper.pl
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

, you can get it from CVS for your own usage: 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[TLDP-CVS / users / Peter-Bieringer]{http://cvsview.tldp.org/index.cgi/LDP/users/}

\end_inset 


\layout Subsubsection

SGML generation
\layout Standard

SGML is generated using export function in LyX.
\layout Standard

Also some fixes are have to be made to create proper SGML code (see also
 here for the Perl programs 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[TLDP-CVS / users / Peter-Bieringer]{http://cvsview.tldp.org/index.cgi/LDP/users/Peter-Bieringer/}

\end_inset 

):
\layout Itemize

Export of LyX table does not create proper 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

colspan
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 tags - tool for fixing: 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

sgmllyxtabletagfix.pl
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 (fixed since LyX 1.2.0)
\layout Itemize

LyX sometimes uses special left/right entities for quotes instead the normal
 one, which will still exist in generated HTML.
 Some browsers don't parse this very well (known: Opera 6 TP 2 or Konqueror)
 - tool for fixing: 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

sgmllyxquotefix.pl
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 


\layout Subsection

On-line references to the HTML version of this HOWTO (linking/anchors)
\layout Subsubsection

Master index page
\layout Standard

Generally, a reference to the master index page is recommended.
 
\layout Subsubsection

Dedicated pages
\layout Standard

Because the HTML pages are generated out of the SGML file, the HTML filenames
 turn out to be quite random.
 However, some pages are tagged in LyX, resulting in static names.
 These tags are useful for references and shouldn't be changed in the future.
\layout Standard

If you think that I have forgotten a tag, please let me know, and I will
 add it.
\layout Section

Preface
\layout Standard

Some things first:
\layout Subsection

How many versions of a Linux & IPv6 related HOWTO are floating around?
\layout Standard

Including this, there are three (3) HOWTO documents available.
 Apologies, if that is too many ;-)
\layout Subsubsection

Linux IPv6 FAQ/HOWTO (outdated)
\layout Standard

The first IPv6 related document was written by 
\emph on 
Eric Osborne
\emph default 
 and called 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Linux IPv6 FAQ/HOWTO]{http://www.linuxhq.com/IPv6/}

\end_inset 

 (please use it only for historical issues).
 
\series bold 
Latest
\series default 
 
\series bold 
version
\series default 
 was 3.2.1 released 14.
 July 
\series bold 
1997
\series default 
.
\layout Standard

Please help: if someone knows the date of birth of this HOWTO, please send
 me an e-mail (information will be needed in 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

history
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

).
\layout Subsubsection

IPv6 & Linux - HowTo (maintained)
\layout Comment

This HOWTO is really named 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

HowTo
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 


\layout Standard

There exists a second version called 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPv6 & Linux - HowTo]{http://www.bieringer.de/linux/IPv6/}

\end_inset 

 written by me (
\emph on 
Peter Bieringer
\emph default 
) in pure HTML.
 
\series bold 
It was born
\series default 
 April 
\series bold 
1997
\series default 
 and the first English version was published in June 1997.
 I will continue to 
\series bold 
maintain 
\series default 
it, but it will slowly fade in favour of the Linux IPv6 HOWTO you are currently
 reading.
\layout Subsubsection

Linux IPv6 HOWTO (this document)
\layout Standard

Because the 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPv6 & Linux - HowTo]{http://www.bieringer.de/linux/IPv6/}

\end_inset 

 is written in pure HTML it's not really compatible with the 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[The Linux Documentation Project (TLDP)]{http://www.tldp.org/}

\end_inset 

.
 I (
\emph on 
Peter Bieringer
\emph default 
) got a request in late November 2001 to rewrite the 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPv6 & Linux - HowTo]{http://www.bieringer.de/linux/IPv6/}

\end_inset 

 in SGML.
 However, because of the discontinuation of that HOWTO (
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Future of IPv6 & Linux - HowTo]{http://www.bieringer.de/linux/IPv6/IPv6-HOWTO/IPv6-HOWTO-0.html#history}

\end_inset 

), and as IPv6 is becoming more and more standard, I decided to write a
 new  document covering basic and advanced issues which will remain important
 over  the next few years.
 Dynamic content will be still found further on in the second HOWTO (
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPv6 & Linux - HowTo]{http://www.bieringer.de/linux/IPv6/}

\end_inset 

).
\layout Section

Used terms
\layout Subsection

Network related
\layout Description

Link A link is a layer 2 network packet transport medium, examples are Ethernet,
 Token Ring, PPP, SLIP, ATM, ISDN, Frame Relay,...
\layout Description

Node A node is a host or a router.
\layout Description

Host Generally a single homed host on a link.
 Normally it has only one active network interface, e.g.
 Ethernet or (not and) PPP.
\layout Description

Dual\SpecialChar ~
homed\SpecialChar ~
host A dual homed host is a node with two network (physical or
 virtual) interfaces on two different links, but does not forward any packets
 between the interfaces.
\layout Description

Router A router is a node with two or more network (physical or virtual)
 interfaces, capable of forwarding packets between the interfaces.
\layout Description

Tunnel A tunnel is typically a point-to-point connection over which packets
 are exchanged which carry the data of another protocol, e.g.
 an IPv6-in-IPv4 tunnel.
\layout Description

NIC Network Interface Card
\layout Subsection

Document related
\layout Subsubsection

Long code line wrapping signal char
\layout Standard

The special character 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

¬
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 is used for signaling that this code line is wrapped for better viewing
 in PDF and PS files.
\layout Subsubsection

Placeholders
\layout Standard

In generic examples you will sometimes find the following:
\layout Code

<myipaddress>
\layout Standard

For real use on your system command line or in scripts this has to be replaced
 with relevant content (removing the < and > of course), the result would
 be e.g.
\layout Code

1.2.3.4
\layout Subsubsection

Commands in the shell
\layout Standard

Commands executable as non-root user begin with $, e.g.
\layout Code

$ whoami
\layout Standard

Commands executable as root user begin with #, e.g.
\layout Code

# whoami
\layout Section

Requirements for using this HOWTO
\layout Subsection

Personal prerequisites
\layout Subsubsection

Experience with Unix tools
\layout Standard

You should be familiar with the major Unix tools e.g.
 
\emph on 
grep
\emph default 
, 
\emph on 
awk
\emph default 
, 
\emph on 
find
\emph default 
, ...
 , and know about their most commonly used command-line options.
\layout Subsubsection

Experience with networking theory
\layout Standard

You should know about layers, protocols, addresses, cables, plugs, etc.
 If you are new to this field, here is one good starting point for you:
 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[linuxports/howto/intro_to_networking]{http://www.linuxports.com/howto/intro_to_networking/}

\end_inset 


\layout Subsubsection

Experience with IPv4 configuration
\layout Standard

You should definitely have some experience in IPv4 configuration, otherwise
 it will be hard for you to understand what is really going on.
\layout Subsubsection

Experience with the Domain Name System (DNS)
\layout Standard

Also you should understand what the Domain Name System (DNS) is, what it
 provides and how to use it.
\layout Subsubsection

Experience with network debugging strategies
\layout Standard

You should at least understand how to use 
\emph on 
tcpdump
\emph default 
 and what
\emph on 
 
\emph default 
it can show you.
 Otherwise, network debugging will very difficult for you.
\layout Subsection

Linux operating system compatible hardware
\layout Standard

Surely you wish to experiment with real hardware, and not only read this
 HOWTO to fall asleep here and there.
 :)
\layout Chapter


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{chapter-basics}

\end_inset 

Basics
\layout Section

What is IPv6?
\layout Standard

IPv6 is a new layer 3 transport protocol (see 
\color red

\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[linuxports/howto/intro_to_networking/ISO - OSI Model]{http://www.linuxports.com/howto/intro_to_networking/c4412.htm#PAGE103HTML}

\end_inset 


\color default
) which will supersede IPv4 (also known as IP).
 IPv4 was designed long time ago (
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[RFC 760]{http://rfc.net/rfc760.html}

\end_inset 

 from January 1980) and since its inception, there have been many requests
 for more addresses and enhanced capabilities.
 Major changes in IPv6 are the redesign of the header, including the increase
 of address size from 32 bits to 128 bits.
 Because layer 3 is responsible for end-to-end packet transport using packet
 routing based on addresses, it must include the new IPv6 addresses (source
 and destination), like IPv4.
\layout Standard

For more information about the IPv6 history take a look at older IPv6 related
 RFCs listed e.g.
 at 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[SWITCH IPv6 Pilot / References]{http://www.switch.ch/lan/ipv6/references.html}

\end_inset 

.
\layout Section


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{basic-history-IPv6-Linux}

\end_inset 

History of IPv6 in Linux
\layout Standard

To-do: better time-line, more content...
\layout Subsection

Beginning
\layout Standard

The first IPv6 related network code was added to the Linux kernel 2.1.8 in
 November 1996 by Pedro Roque.
 It was based on the BSD API:
\layout Code

diff -u --recursive --new-file v2.1.7/linux/include/linux/in6.h
\layout Code

¬ linux/include/linux/in6.h 
\layout Code

--- v2.1.7/linux/include/linux/in6.h Thu Jan 1 02:00:00 1970 
\layout Code

+++ linux/include/linux/in6.h Sun Nov 3 11:04:42 1996 
\layout Code

@@ -0,0 +1,99 @@ 
\layout Code

+/* 
\layout Code

+ * Types and definitions for AF_INET6 
\layout Code

+ * Linux INET6 implementation 
\layout Code

+ * + * Authors: 
\layout Code

+ * Pedro Roque <******> 
\layout Code

+ * 
\layout Code

+ * Source: 
\layout Code

+ * IPv6 Program Interfaces for BSD Systems 
\layout Code

+ * <draft-ietf-ipngwg-bsd-api-05.txt>
\layout Standard

The shown lines were copied from patch-2.1.8 (e-mail address was blanked on
 copy&paste).
\layout Subsection

In between
\layout Standard

Because of lack of manpower, the IPv6 implementation in the kernel was unable
 to follow the discussed drafts or newly released RFCs.
 In October 2000, a project was started in Japan, called 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[USAGI]{http://www.linux-ipv6.org/}

\end_inset 

, whose aim was to implement all missing, or outdated IPv6 support in Linux.
 It tracks the current IPv6 implementation in FreeBSD made by the 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[KAME project]{http://www.kame.net/}

\end_inset 

.
 From time to time they create snapshots against current vanilla Linux kernel
 sources.
\layout Subsection

Current
\layout Standard

Unfortunately, the 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[USAGI]{http://www.linux-ipv6.org/}

\end_inset 

 patch is so big, that current Linux networking maintainers are unable to
 include it in the production source of the Linux kernel 2.4.x series.
 Therefore the 2.4.x series is missing some (many) extensions and also does
 not confirm to all current drafts and RFCs.
 This can cause some interoperability problems with other operating systems.
\layout Subsection

Future
\layout Standard


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[USAGI]{http://www.linux-ipv6.org/}

\end_inset 

 is now making use of the new Linux kernel development series 2.5.x to insert
 all of their current extensions into this development release.
 Hopefully the 2.6.x kernel series will contain a true and up-to-date IPv6
 implementation.
\layout Section

How do IPv6 addresses look like?
\layout Standard
\align left 
As previously mentioned, IPv6 addresses are 128 bits long.
 This number of bits generates very high decimal numbers with up to 39 digits:
 
\layout Code

2^128-1: 340282366920938463463374607431768211455
\layout Standard
\align left 
Such numbers are not really addresses that can be memorized.
 Also the IPv6 address schema is bitwise orientated (just like IPv4, but
 that's not often recognized).
 Therefore a better notation of such big numbers is hexadecimal.
 In hexadecimal, 4 bits (also known as 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

nibble
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

) are represented by a digit or character from 0-9 and a-f (10-15).
 This format reduces the length of the IPv6 address to 32 characters.
\layout Code

2^128-1: 0xffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff
\layout Standard
\align left 
This representation is still not very convenient (possible mix-up or loss
 of single hexadecimal digits), so the designers of IPv6 chose a hexadecimal
 format with a colon as separator after each block of 16 bits.
 In addition, the leading "
\family typewriter 
0x
\family default 
" (a signifier for hexadecimal values used in programming languages) is
 removed:
\layout Code

2^128-1: ffff:ffff:ffff:ffff:ffff:ffff:ffff:ffff
\layout Standard
\align left 
A usable address (see address types later) is e.g.: 
\layout Code

3ffe:ffff:0100:f101:0210:a4ff:fee3:9566
\layout Standard
\align left 
For simplifications, leading zeros of each 16 bit block can be omitted:
 
\layout Code

3ffe:ffff:0100:f101:0210:a4ff:fee3:9566  -> 
\layout Code

¬ 3ffe:ffff:100:f101:210:a4ff:fee3:9566
\layout Standard
\align left 
One sequence of 16 bit blocks containing only zeroes can be replaced with
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 


\family typewriter 
::
\family default 

\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

.
 But not more than one at a time, otherwise it is no longer a unique representat
ion.
 
\layout Code

3ffe:ffff:100:f101:0:0:0:1  ->  3ffe:ffff:100:f101::1
\layout Standard
\align left 
The biggest reduction is seen by the IPv6 localhost address: 
\layout Code

0000:0000:0000:0000:0000:0000:0000:0001  ->  ::1
\layout Standard
\align left 
There is also a so-called 
\emph on 
compact
\emph default 
 (base85 coded) representation defined 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[RFC 1924 / A Compact Representation of IPv6 Addresses]{http://rfc.net/rfc1924.html}

\end_inset 

 (written 1996), never seen in the wild, but here is an example: 
\layout Code

# ipv6calc --addr_to_base85 3ffe:ffff:0100:f101:0210:a4ff:fee3:9566 
\layout Code

Itu&-ZQ82s>J%s99FJXT
\layout Quotation

Info: 
\emph on 
ipv6calc
\emph default 
 is an IPv6 address format calculator and converter program and can be found
 here: 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[ipv6calc]{http://www.bieringer.de/linux/IPv6/ipv6calc/}

\end_inset 


\layout Section

FAQ (Basics)
\layout Subsection

Why is the name IPv6 and not IPv5 as successor for IPv4?
\layout Standard
\align left 
On any IP header, the first 4 bits are reserved for protocol version.
 So theoretically a protocol number between 0 and 15 is possible:
\layout Itemize
\align left 
4: is already used for IPv4
\layout Itemize
\align left 
5: is reserved for the Stream Protocol (STP, 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[RFC 1819]{http://rfc.net/rfc1819.html}

\end_inset 

) (which never really made it to the public)
\layout Standard
\align left 
The next free number was 6.
 Hence IPv6 was born!
\layout Subsection

IPv6 addresses: why such a high number of bits?
\layout Standard
\align left 
During the design of IPv4, people thought that 32 bits were enough for the
 world.
 Looking back into the past, 32 bits were enough until now and will perhaps
 be enough for another few years.
 However, 32 bits are not enough to provide each network device with a global
 address in the future.
 Think about mobile phones, cars (including electronic devices on its CAN-bus),
 toasters, refrigerators, light switches, and so on...
\layout Standard
\align left 
So designers have chosen 128 bits, 4 times more in length and 2^96 greater
 in size than in IPv4 today.
\layout Standard

The usable size is smaller than it may appear however.
 This is because in the currently defined address schema, 64 bits are used
 for interface identifiers.
 The other 64 bits are used for routing.
 Assuming the current strict levels of aggregation (/48, /35, ...), it is still
 possible to 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

run out
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 of space, but hopefully not in the near future.
\layout Subsection

IPv6 addresses: why so small a number of bits on a new design?
\layout Standard
\align left 
While, there are (possibly) some people on the Internet who are thinking
 about IPv8 and IPv16, their design is far away from acceptance and implementati
on.
 In the meantime 128 bits was the best choice regarding header overhead
 and data transport.
 Consider the minimum Maximum Transfer Unit (MTU) in IPv4 (576 octets) and
 in IPv6 (1280 octets), the header length in IPv4 is 20 octets (minimum,
 can increase to 60 octets with IPv4 options) and in IPv6 is 48 octets (fixed).
 This is 3.4 % of MTU in IPv4 and 3.8 % of MTU in IPv6.
 This means the header overhead is almost equal.
 More bits for addresses would require bigger headers and therefore more
 overhead.
 Also, consider the maximum MTU on normal links (like Ethernet today): it's
 1500 octets (in special cases: 9k octets using Jumbo frames).
 Ultimately, it wouldn't be a proper design if 10 % or 20 % of transported
 data in a Layer-3 packet were used for addresses and not for payload.
\layout Chapter


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{chapter-addresstypes}

\end_inset 

Address types
\layout Standard

Like IPv4, IPv6 addresses can be split into network and host parts using
 subnet masks.
\layout Standard

IPv4 has shown that sometimes it would be nice, if more than one IP address
 can be assigned to an interface, each for a different purpose (aliases,
 multi-cast).
 To remain extensible in the future, IPv6 is going further and allows more
 than one IPv6 address to be assigned to an interface.
 There is currently no limit defined by an RFC, only in the implementation
 of the IPv6 stack (to prevent DoS attacks).
\layout Standard

Using this large number of bits for addresses, IPv6 defines address types
 based on some leading bits, which are hopefully never going to be broken
 in the future (unlike IPv4 today and the history of class A, B, and C).
\layout Standard
\align left 
Also the number of bits are separated into a network part (upper 64 bits)
 and a host part (lower 64 bits), to facilitate auto-configuration.
\newline 
BTW: a good URL for displaying a given IPv6 address in detail is the 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Advanced Network Management Laboratory / IPv6 Address Oracle]{http://steinbeck.ucs.indiana.edu:47401/}

\end_inset 

.
\layout Section

Addresses without a special prefix
\layout Subsection

Localhost address
\layout Standard

This is a special address for the loopback interface, similiar to IPv4 with
 its 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

127.0.0.1
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

.
 With IPv6, the localhost address is:
\layout Code

0000:0000:0000:0000:0000:0000:0000:0001 
\layout Standard

or compressed:
\layout Code

::1
\layout Standard
\align left 
Packets with this address as source or destination should never leave the
 sending host.
\layout Subsection

Unspecified address
\layout Standard

This is a special address like 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

any
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 or 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

0.0.0.0
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 in IPv4 .
 For IPv6 it's:
\layout Code

0000:0000:0000:0000:0000:0000:0000:0000 
\layout Standard

or:
\layout Code

::
\layout Standard

These addresses are mostly used/seen in socket binding (to any IPv6 address)
 or routing tables.
\layout Standard

Note: the unspecified address cannot be used as destination address.
\layout Subsection

IPv6 address with embedded IPv4 address
\layout Standard

There are two addresses which contain an IPv4 address.
\layout Subsubsection

IPv4-mapped IPv6 address
\layout Standard

IPv4-only IPv6-compatible addresses are sometimes used/shown for sockets
 created by an IPv6-enabled daemon, but only binding to an IPv4 address.
\layout Standard

These addresses are defined with a special prefix of length 96 (a.b.c.d is
 the IPv4 address):
\layout Code

0:0:0:0:0:ffff:a.b.c.d/96
\layout Standard

or in compressed format
\layout Code

::ffff:a.b.c.d/96
\layout Standard

For example, the IPv4 address 1.2.3.4 looks like this:
\layout Code

::ffff:1.2.3.4
\layout Subsubsection

IPv4-compatible IPv6 address
\layout Standard

Also for sockets, in this case it is for a dual purpose and looks like:
\layout Code

0:0:0:0:0:0:a.b.c.d/96
\layout Standard

or in compressed format
\layout Code

::a.b.c.d/96
\layout Standard

These addresses are also used by automatic tunneling, which is being replaced
 by 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref[6to4 tunneling]{tunneling-6to4}

\end_inset 

.
\layout Section

Network part, also known as prefix
\layout Standard

Designers defined some address types and left a lot of scope for future
 definitions as currently unknown requirements arise.
 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[RFC 2373 [July 1998] / IP Version 6 Addressing Architecture]{http://rfc.net/rfc2373.html}

\end_inset 

 defines the current addressing scheme but there is already a new draft
 available: 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[draft-ietf-ipngwg-addr-arch-*.txt]{ftp://ftp.ietf.org/internet-drafts/}

\end_inset 

.
\layout Standard
\align left 
Now lets take a look at the different types of prefixes (and therefore address
 types):
\layout Subsection

Link local address type
\layout Standard
\align left 
These are special addresses which will only be valid on a link of an interface.
 Using this address as destination the packet would never pass through a
 router.
 It's used for link communications such as:
\layout Itemize
\align left 
anyone else here on this link?
\layout Itemize
\align left 
anyone here with a special address (e.g.
 looking for a router)?
\layout Standard
\align left 
They begin with ( where 
\emph on 

\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

x
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 


\emph default 
 is any hex character, normally 
\emph on 

\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

0
\emph default 

\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

)
\layout Code

fe8
\shape italic 
\emph on 
x:  <- currently the only one in use.
\layout Code

fe9
\shape italic 
\emph on 
x:
\layout Code

fea
\shape italic 
\emph on 
x:
\layout Code

feb
\shape italic 
\emph on 
x:
\layout Standard

An address with this prefix is found on each IPv6-enabled interface after
 stateless auto-configuration (which is normally always the case).
\layout Standard

Note: only fe80 is currently in use.
\layout Subsection

Site local address type
\layout Standard
\align left 
These are addresses similar to the 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[RFC 1918 / Address Allocation for Private Internets]{http://rfc.net/rfc1918.html}

\end_inset 

 in IPv4 today, with the added advantage that everyone who use this address
 type has the capability to use the given 16 bits for a maximum number of
 65536 subnets.
 Comparable with the 
\family typewriter 
10.0.0.0/8
\family default 
 in IPv4 today.
\layout Standard
\align left 
Another advantage: because it's possible to assign more than one address
 to an interface with IPv6, you can also assign such a site local address
 in addition to a global one.
\layout Standard
\align left 
It begins with: 
\layout Code

fec
\shape italic 
\emph on 
x:  <- most commonly used.
\layout Code

fed
\shape italic 
\emph on 
x:
\layout Code

fee
\shape italic 
\emph on 
x:
\layout Code

fef
\shape italic 
\emph on 
x:
\layout Code

\layout Standard

(where
\emph on 
 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

x
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 


\emph default 
 is any hex character, normally 
\emph on 

\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

0
\emph default 

\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

) 
\layout Subsection

Global address type "(Aggregatable) global unicast"
\layout Standard
\align left 
Today, there is one global address type defined (the first design, called
 "provider based," was thrown away some years ago 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[RFC 1884 / IP Version 6 Addressing Architecture [obsolete]]{http://rfc.net/rfc1884.html}

\end_inset 

, you will find some remains in older Linux kernel sources).
\layout Standard
\align left 
It begins with (
\emph on 
x
\emph default 
 are hex characters)
\layout Code

2
\shape italic 
\emph on 
xxx
\shape default 
\emph default 
: 
\layout Code

3
\shape italic 
\emph on 
xxx
\shape default 
\emph default 
:
\layout Standard

Note: the prefix 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

aggregatable
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 is thrown away in current drafts.
\newline 
There are some further subtypes defined, see below:
\layout Subsubsection

6bone test addresses
\layout Standard
\align left 
These were the first global addresses which were defined and in use.
 They all start with 
\layout Code

3ffe:
\layout Standard

Example:
\layout Code

3ffe:ffff:100:f102::1
\layout Standard

A special 6bone test address which will be never be globally unique begins
 with 
\layout Code

3ffe:ffff: 
\layout Standard

and is mostly shown in examples, because if real addresses are shown, its
 possible for someone to do a copy & paste to their configuration files.
 Thus inadvertently causing duplicates on a globally unique address.
 This would cause serious problems for the original host (e.g.
 getting answer packets for request that were never sent).
\newline 

\newline 
You can still apply for one of these prefixes, see here 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[How to join 6bone]{http://www.6bone.net/6bone_hookup.html}

\end_inset 

.
 Also some 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref[tunnel brokers]{information-joinipv6-tunnelbrokers}

\end_inset 

 still distribute 6bone test address prefixes.
\layout Subsubsection

6to4 addresses
\layout Standard
\align left 
These addresses, designed for a special tunneling mechanism [
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[RFC 3056 / Connection of IPv6 Domains via IPv4 Clouds]{http://rfc.net/rfc3056.html}

\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[RFC 2893 / Transition Mechanisms for IPv6 Hosts and Routers]{http://rfc.net/rfc2893.html}

\end_inset 

], encode a given IPv4 address and a possible subnet and begin with 
\layout Code

2002:
\layout Standard

For example, representing 192.168.1.1/5:
\layout Code

2002:c0a8:0101:5::1
\layout Standard

A small shell command line can help you generating such address out of a
 given IPv4 one:
\layout Code

ipv4="1.2.3.4"; sla="5"; printf "2002:%02x%02x:%02x%02x:%04x::1" `echo $ipv4
 | tr "." " "` $sla
\layout Standard

See also 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref[tunneling using 6to4]{tunneling-6to4}

\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref[information about 6to4 relay routers]{information-joinipv6-6to4-tunneling}

\end_inset 

.
\layout Subsubsection

Assigned by provider for hierarchical routing
\layout Standard

These addresses are delegated to Internet service providers (ISP) and begin
 with
\layout Code

2001:
\layout Standard

Prefixes to major (backbone owning) ISPs are delegated by 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref[local registries]{information-majorregionregistries}

\end_inset 

 and currently they assign to them a prefix with length 35.
\layout Standard

Major ISPs normally delegate to minor ISPs a prefix with length 48.
\layout Subsection

Multicast addresses
\layout Standard
\align left 
Multicast addresses are used for related services.
 
\layout Standard
\align left 
They alway start with (
\emph on 
xx
\emph default 
 is the scope value)
\layout Code

ff
\shape italic 
\emph on 
x
\shape default 
\emph default 
y:
\layout Standard

They are split into scopes and types:
\layout Subsubsection

Multicast scopes
\layout Standard

Multicast scope is a parameter to specify the maximum distance a multicast
 packet can travel from the sending entity.
\layout Standard

Currently, the following regions (scopes) are defined:
\layout Itemize

ffx1: node-local, packets never leave the node.
\layout Itemize

ffx2: link-local, packets are never forwarded by routers, so they never
 leave the specified link.
\layout Itemize

ffx5: site-local, packets never leave the site.
\layout Itemize

ffx8: organization-local, packets never leave the organization (not so easy
 to implement, must be covered by routing protocol).
\layout Itemize

ffxe: global scope.
\layout Itemize

others are reserved
\layout Subsubsection

Multicast types
\layout Standard

There are many types already defined/reserved (see 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[RFC 2373 / IP Version 6 Addressing Architecture]{http://rfc.net/rfc2373.html}

\end_inset 

 for details).
 Some examples are:
\layout Itemize

All Nodes Address: ID = 1h, addresses all hosts on the local node (ff01:0:0:0:0:
0:0:1) or the connected link (ff02:0:0:0:0:0:0:1).
\layout Itemize

All Routers Address: ID = 2h, addresses all routers on the local node (ff01:0:0:
0:0:0:0:2), on the connected link (ff02:0:0:0:0:0:0:2), or on the local
 site (ff05:0:0:0:0:0:0:2)
\layout Subsubsection

Solicited node link-local multicast address
\layout Standard

Special multicast address used as destination address in neighborhood discovery,
 because unlike in IPv4, ARP no longer exists in IPv6.
\layout Standard

An example of this address looks like
\layout Code

ff02::1:ff00:1234
\layout Standard

Used prefix shows that this is a link-local multicast address.
 The suffix is generated from the destination address.
 In this example, a packet should be sent to address 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

fe80::1234
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

, but the network stack doesn't know the current layer 2 MAC address.
 It replaces the upper 104 bits with 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

ff02:0:0:0:0:1:ff00::/104
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 and leaves the lower 24 bits untouched.
 This address is now used `on-link' to find the corresponding node which
 has to send a reply containing its layer 2 MAC address.
\layout Subsection

Anycast addresses
\layout Standard

Anycast addresses are special addresses and are used to cover things like
 nearest DNS server, nearest DHCP server, or similar dynamic groups.
 Addresses are taken out of the unicast address space (aggregatable global
 or site-local at the moment).
 The anycast mechanism (client view) will be handled by dynamic routing
 protocols.
\layout Standard

Note: Anycast addresses cannot be used as source addresses, they are only
 used as destination addresses.
\layout Subsubsection

Subnet-router anycast address
\layout Standard

A simple example for an anycast addresses is the subnet-router anycast address.
 Assuming that a node has the following global assigned IPv6 address:
\layout Code

3ffe:ffff:100:f101:210:a4ff:fee3:9566/64  <- Node's address
\layout Standard

The subnet-router anycast address will be created blanking the suffix (least
 significant 64 bits) completely:
\layout Code

3ffe:ffff:100:f101::/64  <- subnet-router anycast address
\layout Section

Address types (host part)
\layout Standard
\align left 
For auto-configuration and mobility issues, it was decided to use the lower
 64 bits as host part of the address in most of the current address types.
 Therefore each single subnet can hold a large amount of addresses.
\layout Standard
\align left 
This host part can be inspected differently: 
\layout Subsection

Automatically computed (also known as stateless)
\layout Standard

With auto-configuration, the host part of the address is computed by converting
 the MAC address of an interface (if available), with the EUI-64 method,
 to a unique IPv6 address.
 If no MAC address is available (happens e.g.
 on virtual devices), something else (like the IPv4 addresses or the MAC
 address of a physical interface) is used instead.
\layout Standard
\align left 
Consider again the first example 
\layout Code

3ffe:ffff:100:f101:210:a4ff:fee3:9566
\layout Standard
\align left 
here, 
\layout Code

210:a4ff:fee3:9566 
\layout Standard
\align left 
is the host part and computed from the NIC's MAC address 
\layout Code

00:10:A4:E3:95:66 
\layout Standard
\align left 
using the 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IEEE-Tutorial EUI-64]{http://standards.ieee.org/regauth/oui/tutorials/EUI64.html}

\end_inset 

 design for EUI-48 identifiers.
\layout Subsubsection

Privacy problem with automatically computed and solution
\layout Standard
\align left 
Because the "automatically computed" host part is globally unique (except
 when a vendor of a NIC uses the same MAC address on more than one NIC),
 client tracking is possible on the host when not using a proxy of any kind.
\layout Standard
\align left 
This is a known problem, and a solution was defined: privacy extension,
 defined in 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[RFC 3041 / Privacy Extensions for Stateless Address Autoconfiguration in IPv6]{http://rfc.net/rfc3041.html}

\end_inset 

 (there is also already a newer draft available: 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[draft-ietf-ipngwg-temp-addresses-*.txt]{ftp://ftp.ietf.org/internet-drafts/}

\end_inset 

).
 Using a random and a static value a new suffix is generated from time to
 time.
 Note: this is only reasonable for outgoing client connections and isn't
 really useful for well-known servers.
\layout Subsection

Manually set
\layout Standard

For servers it's probably easier to remember simpler addresses, this can
 also be accommodated.
 It is possible to assign an additional IPv6 address to an interface, e.g.
 
\layout Code

3ffe:ffff:100:f101::1
\layout Standard

For manual suffixes like 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

::1
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 shown in the above example it's required that the 6th most significant
 bit is set to 0 (the universal/local bit of the automatically generated
 identifier).
 Also some other (otherwise unchosen ) bit combinations are reserved for
 anycast addresses, too.
\layout Section

Prefix lengths for routing
\layout Standard

In the early design phase it was planned to use a fully hierarchical routing
 approach to reduce the size of the routing tables maximally.
 The reasoning behind this approach were the number of current IPv4 routing
 entries in core routers (> 104 thousand in May 2001), reducing the need
 of memory in hardware routers (ASIC driven) to hold the routing table and
 increase speed (fewer entries hopefully result in faster lookups).
\layout Standard
\align left 
Todays view is that routing will be mostly hierarchically designed for networks
 with only one service provider.
 With more than one ISP connections, this is not possible, and subject to
 an issue named multi-homing.
\layout Subsection

Prefix lengths (also known as "netmasks")
\layout Standard
\align left 
Similar to IPv4, the routable network path for routing to take place.
 Because standard netmask notation for 128 bits doesn't look nice, designers
 employed the IPv4 Classless Inter Domain Routing (CIDR, 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[RFC 1519 / Classless Inter-Domain Routing]{http://rfc.net/rfc1519.html}

\end_inset 

) scheme, which specifies the number of bits of the IP address to be used
 for routing.
 It is also called the "slash" notation.
\layout Standard
\align left 
An example: 
\layout Code

3ffe:ffff:100:1:2:3:4:5/48
\layout Standard
\align left 
This notation will be expanded:
\layout Itemize

Network: 
\layout Code

3ffe:ffff:0100:0000:0000:0000:0000:0000
\layout Itemize

Net-mask: 
\layout Code

ffff:ffff:ffff:0000:0000:0000:0000:0000
\layout Subsection

Matching a route
\layout Standard

Under normal circumstances (no QoS) a lookup in a routing table results
 in the route with the most significant number of address bits means the
 route with the biggest prefix length matches first.
\layout Standard

For example if a routing table shows following entries (list is not complete):
\layout Code

3ffe:ffff:100::/48     ::            U  1 0 0 sit1 
\layout Code

2000::/3               ::192.88.99.1 UG 1 0 0 tun6to4
\layout Standard

Shown destination addresses of IPv6 packets will be routed through shown
 device
\layout Code

3ffe:ffff:100:1:2:3:4:5/48  ->  routed through device sit1
\layout Code

3ffe:ffff:200:1:2:3:4:5/48  ->  routed through device tun6to4
\layout Chapter


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{chapter-systemcheck}

\end_inset 

IPv6-ready system check
\layout Standard
\align left 
Before you can start using IPv6 on a Linux host, you have to test, whether
 your system is IPv6-ready.
 You may have to do some work to enable it first.
\layout Section


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{systemcheck-kernel}

\end_inset 

IPv6-ready kernel
\layout Standard
\align left 
Modern Linux distributions already contain IPv6-ready kernels, the IPv6
 capability is generally compiled as a module, but it's possible that this
 module is not loaded automatically on startup.
\layout Standard

See 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPv6+Linux-Status-Distribution]{http://www.bieringer.de/linux/IPv6/status/IPv6+Linux-status-distributions.html}

\end_inset 

 page for most up-to-date information.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Note: you shouldn't anymore use kernel series 2.2.x, because it's not IPv6-up-to-d
ate anymore.
\layout Subsection

Check for IPv6 support in the current running kernel
\layout Standard
\align left 
To check, whether your current running kernel supports IPv6, take a look
 into your 
\family typewriter 
/proc
\family default 
-file-system.
 Following entry must exists: 
\layout Code

/proc/net/if_inet6
\layout Standard
\align left 
A short automatical test looks like:
\layout Code

# test -f /proc/net/if_inet6 && echo "Running kernel is IPv6 ready"
\layout Standard
\align left 
If this fails, it is quite likely, that the IPv6 module is not loaded.
\layout Subsection

Try to load IPv6 module
\layout Standard
\align left 
You can try to load the IPv6 module executing
\layout Code

# modprobe ipv6
\layout Standard
\align left 
If this is successful, this module should be listed, testable with following
 auto-magically line:
\layout Code

# lsmod |grep -w 'ipv6' && echo "IPv6 module successfully loaded"
\layout Standard
\align left 
And the check shown above should now run successfully.
\layout Standard

Note: unloading the module is currently not supported and can result, under
 some circumstances, in a kernel crash.
\layout Subsubsection

Automatically loading of module
\layout Standard

Its possible to automatically load the IPv6 module on demand.
 You only have to add following line in the configuration file of the kernel
 module loader (normally /etc/modules.conf or /etc/conf.modules):
\layout Code

alias net-pf-10 ipv6  # automatically load IPv6 module on demand
\layout Standard

It's also possible to disable automatically loading of the IPv6 module using
 following line
\layout Code

alias net-pf-10 off   # disable automatically load of IPv6 module on demand
\layout Subsection

Compile kernel with IPv6 capabilities
\layout Standard
\align left 
If both above shown results were negative and your kernel has no IP6 support,
 than you have the following options:
\layout Itemize
\align left 
Update your distribution to a current one which supports IPv6 out-of-the-box
 (recommended for newbies), see here again: 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPv6+Linux-Status-Distribution]{http://www.bieringer.de/linux/IPv6/status/IPv6+Linux-status-distributions.html}

\end_inset 


\layout Itemize
\align left 
Compile a new vanilla kernel (easy, if you know which options you needed)
\layout Itemize

Recompile kernel sources given by your Linux distribution (sometimes not
 so easy)
\layout Itemize
\align left 
Compile a kernel with USAGI extensions
\layout Standard
\align left 
If you decide to compile a kernel, you should have previous experience in
 kernel compiling and read the 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Linux Kernel HOWTO]{http://www.linuxdoc.org/HOWTO/Kernel-HOWTO.html}

\end_inset 

.
\layout Standard

A mostly up-to-time comparison between vanilla and USAGI extended kernels
 is available on 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPv6+Linux-Status-Kernel]{http://www.bieringer.de/linux/IPv6/status/IPv6+Linux-status-kernel.html}

\end_inset 

.
\layout Subsubsection

Compiling a vanilla kernel
\layout Standard

More detailed hints about compiling an IPv6-enabled kernel can be found
 e.g.
 on 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPv6-HOWTO-2#kernel]{http://www.bieringer.de/linux/IPv6/IPv6-HOWTO/IPv6-HOWTO-2.html#kernel}

\end_inset 

.
\layout Standard

Note: you should use whenever possible kernel series 2.4.x or above, because
 the IPv6 support in series 2.2.x is not so in current state and needs some
 patches for ICMPv6 and 6to4 support (can be found on 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[kernel series 2.2.x IPv6 patches]{ftp://ftp.bieringer.de/pub/linux/IPv6/kernel}

\end_inset 

).
\layout Subsubsection

Compiling a kernel with USAGI extensions
\layout Standard
\align left 
Same as for vanilla kernel, only recommend for advanced users, which are
 already familiar with IPv6 and kernel compilation.
 See also 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[USAGI project / FAQ]{http://www.linux-ipv6.org/faq.html}

\end_inset 

.
\layout Subsection

IPv6-ready network devices
\layout Standard

Not all existing network devices have already (or ever) the capability to
 transport IPv6 packets.
 A current status can be found at 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPv6+Linux-status-kernel.html#transport]{http://www.bieringer.de/linux/IPv6/status/IPv6+Linux-status-kernel.html#transport}

\end_inset 

.
\layout Standard

A major issue is that because of the network layer structure of kernel implement
ation an IPv6 packet isn't really recognized by it's IP header number (6
 instead of 4).
 It's recognized by the protocol number of the Layer 2 transport protocol.
 Therefore any transport protocol which doesn't use such protocol number
 cannot dispatch IPv6 packets.
 Note: the packet is still transported over the link, but on receivers side,
 the dispatching won't work (you can see this e.g.
 using tcpdump).
\layout Subsubsection

Currently known never 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

IPv6 capable links
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 


\layout Itemize

Serial Line IP (SLIP, 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[RFC 1055]{http://rfc.net/rfc1055.html}

\end_inset 

), should be better called now to SLIPv4, device named: slX
\layout Itemize

Parallel Line IP (PLIP), same like SLIP, device names: plipX
\layout Itemize

ISDN with encapsulation 
\emph on 
rawip
\emph default 
, device names: isdnX
\layout Subsubsection

Currently known 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

not supported IPv6 capable links
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 


\layout Itemize

ISDN with encapsulation 
\emph on 
syncppp
\emph default 
, device names: ipppX (design issue of the ipppd, will be merged into more
 general PPP layer in kernel series 2.5.x)
\layout Section

IPv6-ready network configuration tools
\layout Standard
\align left 
You wont get very far, if you are running an IPv6-ready kernel, but have
 no tools to configure IPv6.
 There are several packages in existence which can configure IPv6.
\layout Subsection

net-tools package
\layout Standard
\align left 
The net-tool package includes some tools like 
\family typewriter 
ifconfig
\family default 
 and 
\family typewriter 
route
\family default 
, which helps you to configure IPv6 on an interface.
 Look at the output of 
\family typewriter 
ifconfig -?
\family default 
 or 
\family typewriter 
route -?
\family default 
, if something is shown like IPv6 or inet6, then the tool is IPv6-ready.
\layout Standard
\align left 
Auto-magically check:
\layout Code

# /sbin/ifconfig -? 2>& 1|grep -qw 'inet6' && echo "utility 'ifconfig' is
\layout Code

¬ IPv6-ready"
\layout Standard
\align left 
Same check can be done for 
\family typewriter 
route
\family default 
:
\layout Code

# /sbin/route -? 2>& 1|grep -qw 'inet6' && echo "utility 'route' is IPv6-ready"
\layout Subsection

iproute package
\layout Standard
\align left 
Alexey N.
 Kuznetsov (current a maintainer of the Linux networking code) created a
 tool-set which configures networks through the netlink device.
 Using this tool-set you have more functionality than net-tools provides,
 but its not very well documented and isn't for the faint of heart.
 
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip 2>&1 |grep -qw 'inet6' && echo "utility 'ip' is IPv6-ready"
\layout Standard

If the program /sbin/ip isn't found, then I strongly recommend you install
 the iproute package.
 
\layout Itemize

You can get it from your Linux distribution (if contained)
\layout Itemize

You can download the tar-ball and recompile it: 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Original FTP source]{ftp://ftp.inr.ac.ru/ip-routing/}

\end_inset 

 and mirror (missing)
\layout Itemize

You've able to look for a proper RPM package at 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[RPMfind/iproute]{http://rpmfind.net/linux/rpm2html/search.php?query=iproute}

\end_inset 

 (sometimes rebuilding of a SRPMS package is recommended)
\layout Section

IPv6-ready test/debug programs
\layout Standard
\align left 
After you have prepared your system for IPv6, you now want to use IPv6 for
 network communications.
 First you should learn how to examine IPv6 packets with a sniffer program.
 This is strongly recommended because for debugging/troubleshooting issues
 this can aide in providing a diagnosis very quickly.
\layout Subsection


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{program-ping6}

\end_inset 

IPv6 ping
\layout Standard

This program is normally included in package 
\emph on 
iputils
\emph default 
.
 It is designed for simple transport tests sending ICMPv6 echo-request packets
 and wait for ICMPv6 echo-reply packets.
\layout Standard

Usage
\layout Code

# ping6 <hostwithipv6address>
\layout Code

# ping6 <ipv6address>
\layout Code

# ping6 [-I <device>] <link-local-ipv6address>
\layout Standard

Example
\layout Code

# ping6 -c 1 ::1 
\layout Code

PING ::1(::1) from ::1 : 56 data bytes 
\layout Code

64 bytes from ::1: icmp_seq=0 hops=64 time=292 usec
\layout Code

\layout Code

--- ::1 ping statistics --- 
\layout Code

1 packets transmitted, 1 packets received, 0% packet loss 
\layout Code

round-trip min/avg/max/mdev = 0.292/0.292/0.292/0.000 ms
\layout Standard

Hint: ping6 needs raw access to socket and therefore root permissions.
 So if non-root users cannot use ping6 then there are two possible problems:
\layout Enumerate

ping6 is not in users path (probably, because ping6 is generally stored
 in /usr/sbin -> add path (not really recommended)
\layout Enumerate

ping6 doesn't execute properly, generally because of missing root permissions
 -> chmod u+s /usr/sbin/ping6
\layout Subsubsection

Specifying interface for IPv6 ping
\layout Standard

Using link-local addresses for an IPv6 ping, the kernel does not know through
 which (physically or virtual) device it must send the packet - each device
 has a link-local address.
 A try will result in following error message:
\layout Code

# ping6 fe80::212:34ff:fe12:3456 
\layout Code

connect: Invalid argument
\layout Standard

In this case you have to specify the interface additionally like shown here:
\layout Code

# ping6 -I eth0 -c 1 fe80::2e0:18ff:fe90:9205 
\layout Code

PING fe80::212:23ff:fe12:3456(fe80::212:23ff:fe12:3456) from
\layout Code

¬ fe80::212:34ff:fe12:3478 eth0: 56 data bytes 
\layout Code

64 bytes from fe80::212:23ff:fe12:3456: icmp_seq=0 hops=64 time=445 usec
\layout Code

\layout Code

--- fe80::2e0:18ff:fe90:9205 ping statistics --- 
\layout Code

1 packets transmitted, 1 packets received, 0% packet loss round-trip
\layout Code

¬ min/avg/max/mdev = 0.445/0.445/0.445/0.000 ms
\layout Subsubsection

Ping6 to multicast addresses
\layout Standard

An interesting mechanism to detect IPv6-active hosts on a link is to ping6
 to the link-local all-node multicast address:
\layout Code

# ping6 -I eth0 ff02::1 PING ff02::1(ff02::1) from fe80:::2ab:cdff:feef:0123
 eth0: 56 data bytes
\layout Code

64 bytes from ::1: icmp_seq=1 ttl=64 time=0.104 ms
\layout Code

64 bytes from fe80::212:34ff:fe12:3450: icmp_seq=1 ttl=64 time=0.549 ms (DUP!)
 
\layout Standard

Unlike in IPv4, where replies to a ping on the broadcast address can be
 disabled, in IPv6 currently this behavior cannot be disable except by local
 IPv6 firewalling.
\layout Subsection


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{program-traceroute6}

\end_inset 

IPv6 traceroute6
\layout Standard

This program is normally included in package 
\emph on 
iputils
\emph default 
.
 It's a program similar to IPv4 traceroute.
 But unlike modern IPv4 versions, the IPv6 one still doesn't understand
 to traceroute using ICMP echo-request packets (which is more accepted by
 firewalls around than UDP packets to high ports).
 Below you will see an example:
\layout Code

# traceroute6 www.6bone.net 
\layout Code

traceroute to 6bone.net (3ffe:b00:c18:1::10) from 3ffe:ffff:0000:f101::2,
 30
\layout Code

¬ hops max, 16 byte packets 
\layout Code

 1 localipv6gateway (3ffe:ffff:0000:f101::1) 1.354 ms 1.566 ms 0.407 ms 
\layout Code

 2 swi6T1-T0.ipv6.switch.ch (3ffe:2000:0:400::1) 90.431 ms 91.956 ms 92.377 ms
 
\layout Code

 3 3ffe:2000:0:1::132 (3ffe:2000:0:1::132) 118.945 ms 107.982 ms 114.557 ms
 
\layout Code

 4 3ffe:c00:8023:2b::2 (3ffe:c00:8023:2b::2) 968.468 ms 993.392 ms 973.441
 ms 
\layout Code

 5 3ffe:2e00:e:c::3 (3ffe:2e00:e:c::3) 507.784 ms 505.549 ms 508.928 ms 
\layout Code

 6 www.6bone.net (3ffe:b00:c18:1::10) 1265.85 ms * 1304.74 ms
\layout Subsection


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{program-tracepath6}

\end_inset 

IPv6 tracepath6
\layout Standard

This program is normally included in package 
\emph on 
iputils
\emph default 
.
 It's a program like traceroute6 and traces the path to a given destination
 discovering the MTU along this path.
 Below you will see an example:
\layout Code

# tracepath6 www.6bone.net 
\layout Code

 1?: [LOCALHOST] pmtu 1480 
\layout Code

 1: 3ffe:401::2c0:33ff:fe02:14 150.705ms 
\layout Code

 2: 3ffe:b00:c18::5 267.864ms 
\layout Code

 3: 3ffe:b00:c18::5 asymm 2 266.145ms pmtu 1280 
\layout Code

 3: 3ffe:3900:5::2 asymm 4 346.632ms 
\layout Code

 4: 3ffe:28ff:ffff:4::3 asymm 5 365.965ms 
\layout Code

 5: 3ffe:1cff:0:ee::2 asymm 4 534.704ms 
\layout Code

 6: 3ffe:3800::1:1 asymm 4 578.126ms !N 
\layout Code

Resume: pmtu 1280
\layout Subsection


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{program-tcpdump}

\end_inset 

IPv6 tcpdump
\layout Standard

On Linux, tcpdump is the major tool for packet capturing.
 Below you find some examples.
 IPv6 support is normally built-in in current releases of version 3.6.
\layout Standard

tcpdump uses expressions for filtering packets to minimize the noise:
\layout Itemize

icmp6: filters native ICMPv6 traffic
\layout Itemize

ip6: filters native IPv6 traffic (including ICMPv6)
\layout Itemize

proto ipv6: filters tunneled IPv6-in-IPv4 traffic
\layout Itemize

not port ssh: to suppress displaying SSH packets for running tcpdump in
 a remote SSH session
\layout Standard

Also some command line options are very useful to catch and print more informati
on in a packet, mostly interesting for digging into ICMPv6 packets:
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

-s 512
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

: increase the snap length during capturing of a packet to 512 bytes
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

-vv
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

: really verbose output
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

-n
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

: don't resolve addresses to names, useful if reverse DNS resolving isn't
 working proper
\layout Subsubsection

IPv6 ping to
\size footnotesize 
 3ffe:ffff:100:f101::1
\size default 
 native over a local link
\layout Code

# tcpdump -t -n -i eth0 -s 512 -vv ip6 or proto ipv6 
\layout Code

tcpdump: listening on eth0 
\layout Code

3ffe:ffff:100:f101:2e0:18ff:fe90:9205 > 3ffe:ffff:100:f101::1: icmp6: echo
\layout Code

¬ request (len 64, hlim 64) 
\layout Code

3ffe:ffff:100:f101::1 > 3ffe:ffff:100:f101:2e0:18ff:fe90:9205: icmp6: echo
\layout Code

¬ reply (len 64, hlim 64)
\layout Subsubsection

IPv6 ping to 
\size footnotesize 
3ffe:ffff:100::1
\size default 
 routed through an IPv6-in-IPv4-tunnel
\layout Standard

1.2.3.4 and 5.6.7.8 are tunnel endpoints (all addresses are examples)
\layout Code

# tcpdump -t -n -i ppp0 -s 512 -vv ip6 or proto ipv6 
\layout Code

tcpdump: listening on ppp0 
\layout Code

1.2.3.4 > 5.6.7.8: 2002:ffff:f5f8::1 > 3ffe:ffff:100::1: icmp6: echo request
\layout Code

¬ (len 64, hlim 64) (DF) (ttl 64, id 0, len 124) 
\layout Code

5.6.7.8 > 1.2.3.4: 3ffe:ffff:100::1 > 2002:ffff:f5f8::1: icmp6: echo reply (len
\layout Code

¬ 64, hlim 61) (ttl 23, id 29887, len 124) 
\layout Code

1.2.3.4 > 5.6.7.8: 2002:ffff:f5f8::1 > 3ffe:ffff:100::1: icmp6: echo request
\layout Code

¬ (len 64, hlim 64) (DF) (ttl 64, id 0, len 124) 
\layout Code

5.6.7.8 > 1.2.3.4: 3ffe:ffff:100::1 > 2002:ffff:f5f8::1: icmp6: echo reply (len
\layout Code

¬ 64, hlim 61) (ttl 23, id 29919, len 124)
\layout Section

IPv6-ready programs
\layout Standard

Current distributions already contain the most needed IPv6 enabled client
 and servers.
 See first on 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPv6+Linux-Status-Distribution]{http://www.bieringer.de/linux/IPv6/status/IPv6+Linux-status-distributions.html}

\end_inset 

.
 If still not included, you can check 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPv6 & Linux - Current Status - Applications]{http://www.bieringer.de/linux/IPv6/status/IPv6+Linux-status-apps.html}

\end_inset 

 whether the program is already ported to IPv6 and usable with Linux.
 For common used programs there are some hints available at 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPv6 & Linux - HowTo - Part 3]{http://www.bieringer.de/linux/IPv6/IPv6-HOWTO/IPv6-HOWTO-3.html}

\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPv6 & Linux - HowTo - Part 4]{http://www.bieringer.de/linux/IPv6/IPv6-HOWTO/IPv6-HOWTO-4.html}

\end_inset 

.
\layout Section

IPv6-ready client programs (selection)
\layout Standard

To run the following shown tests, it's required that your system is IPv6
 enabled, and some examples show addresses which only can be reached if
 a connection to the 6bone is available.
\layout Subsection

Checking DNS for resolving IPv6 addresses
\layout Standard

Because of security updates in the last years every Domain Name System (DNS)
 server should run newer software which already understands the (intermediate)
 IPv6 address-type AAAA (the newer one named A6 isn't still common at the
 moment because only supported using BIND9 and newer and also the non-existent
 support of root domain IP6.ARPA).
 A simple whether the used system can resolve IPv6 addresses is
\layout Code

# host -t AAAA www.join.uni-muenster.de
\layout Standard

and should show something like following:
\layout Code

www.join.uni-muenster.de.
 is an alias for ns.join.uni-muenster.de.
 
\layout Code

ns.join.uni-muenster.de.
 has AAAA address 3ffe:400:10:100:201:2ff:feb5:3806
\layout Subsection

IPv6-ready telnet clients
\layout Standard

IPv6-ready telnet clients are available.
 A simple test can be done with
\layout Code

$ telnet 3ffe:400:100::1 80
\layout Code

Trying 3ffe:400:100::1...
 
\layout Code

Connected to 3ffe:400:100::1.
 
\layout Code

Escape character is '^]'.
 
\layout Code

HEAD / HTTP/1.0
\layout Code

\layout Code

HTTP/1.1 200 OK 
\layout Code

Date: Sun, 16 Dec 2001 16:07:21 
\layout Code

GMT Server: Apache/2.0.28 (Unix) 
\layout Code

Last-Modified: Wed, 01 Aug 2001 21:34:42 GMT 
\layout Code

ETag: "3f02-a4d-b1b3e080" 
\layout Code

Accept-Ranges: bytes 
\layout Code

Content-Length: 2637 
\layout Code

Connection: close 
\layout Code

Content-Type: text/html; charset=ISO-8859-1
\layout Code

\layout Code

Connection closed by foreign host.
\layout Standard

If the telnet client don't understand the IPv6 address and says something
 like 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

cannot resolve hostname
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

, then it's not IPv6-enabled.
\layout Subsection

IPv6-ready ssh clients
\layout Subsubsection

openssh
\layout Standard

Current versions of openssh are IPv6-ready.
 Depending on configuring before compiling it has two behavior.
\layout Itemize

--without-ipv4-default: the client tries an IPv6 connect first automatically
 and fall back to IPv4 if not working
\layout Itemize

--with-ipv4-default: default connection is IPv4, IPv6 connection must be
 force like following example shows
\layout Code

$ ssh 
\series bold 
-6
\series default 
 ::1 
\layout Code

user@::1's password: ****** 
\layout Code

[user@ipv6host user]$
\layout Standard

If your ssh client doesn't understand the option 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

-6
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 then it's not IPv6-enabled, like most ssh version 1 packages.
\layout Subsubsection

ssh.com
\layout Standard

SSH.com's SSH client and server is also IPv6 aware now and is free for all
 Linux and FreeBSD machine regardless if used for personal or commercial
 use.
\layout Subsection

IPv6-ready web browsers
\layout Standard

A current status of IPv6 enabled web browsers is available at 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPv6+Linux-status-apps.html#HTTP]{http://www.bieringer.de/linux/IPv6/status/IPv6+Linux-status-apps.html#HTTP}

\end_inset 

.
\layout Standard

Most of them have unresolved problems at the moment
\layout Enumerate

If using an IPv4 only proxy in the settings, IPv6 requests will be sent
 to the proxy, but the proxy will fail to understand the request and the
 request fails.
 Solution: update proxy software (see later).
\layout Enumerate

Automatic proxy settings (*.pac) cannot be extended to handle IPv6 requests
 differently (e.g.
 don't use proxy) because of their nature (written in Java-script and well
 hard coded in source like to be seen in Maxilla source code).
\layout Standard

Also older versions don't understand an URL with IPv6 encoded addresses
 like 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[http://[3ffe:400:100::1]/]{http://[3ffe:400:100::1]/}

\end_inset 

 (this given URL only works with an IPv6-enabled browser!).
\layout Standard

A short test is to try shown URL with a given browser and using no proxy.
\layout Subsubsection

URLs for testing
\layout Standard

A good starting point for browsing using IPv6 is 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[http://www.kame.net/]{http://www.kame.net/}

\end_inset 

.
 If the turtle on this page is animated, the connection is via IPv6, otherwise
 the turtle is static.
\layout Section

IPv6-ready server programs
\layout Standard

In this part of this HOWTO, more client specific issues are mentioned.
 Therefore hints for IPv6-ready servers like sshd, httpd, telnetd, etc.
 are shown below in 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref[Hints for IPv6-enabled daemons]{chapter-hints-daemons}

\end_inset 

.
\layout Section


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{faq-ipv6-ready-system-check}

\end_inset 

FAQ (IPv6-ready system check)
\layout Subsection

Using tools
\layout Subsubsection

Q: Cannot ping6 to link-local addresses
\layout Standard

Error message: "
\emph on 
connect: Invalid argument
\emph default 
"
\layout Standard

Kernel doesn't know, which physical or virtual link you want to use to send
 such ICMPv6 packets.
 Therefore it displays this error message.
\layout Standard

Solution: Specify interface like: 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

ping6 
\series bold 
-I eth0
\series default 
 fe80::2e0:18ff:fe90:9205
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

, see also 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref[program ping6 usage]{program-ping6}

\end_inset 

.
\layout Subsubsection

Q: Cannot ping6 or traceroute6 as normal user
\layout Standard

Error message: 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 


\emph on 
icmp socket: Operation not permitted
\emph default 

\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 


\layout Standard

These utilities create special ICMPv6 packets and send them out.
 This is done by using raw sockets in the kernel.
 But raw sockets can only be used by the 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

root
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 user.
 Therefore normal users get such error message.
\layout Standard

Solution: If it's really needed that all users should be able to use this
 utilities, you can add the 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

suid
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 bit using 
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

chmod u+s /path/to/program
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

, see also 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref[program ping6 usage]{program-ping6}

\end_inset 

.
 If not all users should be able to, you can change the group of the program
 to e.g.
 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

wheel
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

, add this power users to this group and remove the execution bit for other
 users using 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

chmod o-rwx /path/to/program
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

.
 Or configure 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

sudo
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 to enable your security policy.
 
\layout Chapter


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{chapter-configuration-interface}

\end_inset 

Configuring interfaces
\layout Section

Different network devices
\layout Standard

On a node, there exist different network devices.
 They can be collected in classes
\layout Itemize

Physically bounded, like eth0, tr0
\layout Itemize

Virtually existing, like ppp0, tun0, tap0, sit0, isdn0, ippp0
\layout Subsection

Physically bounded
\layout Standard

Physically bounded interfaces like Ethernet or Token-Ring are normal ones
 and need no special treatment.
\layout Subsection

Virtually bounded
\layout Standard

Virtually bounded interfaces always need special support
\layout Subsubsection

IPv6-in-IPv4 tunnel interfaces
\layout Standard

This interfaces are normally named 
\series bold 
sit
\emph on 
x
\series default 
\emph default 
.
 The name 
\emph on 
sit
\emph default 
 is a shortcut for 
\series bold 
S
\series default 
imple 
\series bold 
I
\series default 
nternet 
\series bold 
T
\series default 
ransition.
 This device has the capability to encapsulate IPv6 packets into IPv4 ones
 and tunnel them to a foreign endpoint.
\layout Standard


\series bold 
sit0
\series default 
 has a special meaning and cannot be used for dedicated tunnels.
\layout Subsubsection

PPP interfaces
\layout Standard

PPP interfaces get their IPv6 capability from an IPv6 enabled PPP daemon.
\layout Subsubsection

ISDN HDLC interfaces
\layout Standard

IPv6 capability for HDLC with encapsulation 
\series bold 
ip
\series default 
 is already built-in in the kernel
\layout Subsubsection

ISDN PPP interfaces 
\layout Standard

ISDN PPP interfaces (ippp) aren't IPv6 enabled by kernel.
 Also there are also no plans to do that because in kernel 2.5.+ they will
 be replaced by a more generic ppp interface layer.
\layout Subsubsection

SLIP + PLIP
\layout Standard

Like mentioned earlier, this interfaces don't support IPv6 transport (sending
 is OK, but dispatching on receiving don't work).
\layout Subsubsection

Ether-tap device
\layout Standard

Ether-tap devices are IPv6-enabled and also stateless configured.
 For use, the module 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

ethertap
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 has to be loaded before.
\layout Subsubsection

tun devices
\layout Standard

Currently not tested by me.
\layout Subsubsection

ATM
\layout Standard

01/2002: Aren't currently supported by vanilla kernel, supported by USAGI
 extension
\layout Subsubsection

Others
\layout Standard

Did I forget an interface?...
\layout Section

Bringing interfaces up/down
\layout Standard

Two methods can be used to bring interfaces up or down.
\layout Subsection

Using "ip"
\layout Standard

Usage: 
\layout Code

# ip link set dev <interface> up
\layout Code

# ip link set dev <interface> down
\layout Standard

Example:
\layout Code

\layout Code

# ip link set dev eth0 up
\layout Code

# ip link set dev eth0 down
\layout Subsection

Using "ifconfig"
\layout Standard
\align left 
Usage: 
\layout Code

# /sbin/ifconfig <interface> up
\layout Code

# /sbin/ifconfig <interface> down
\layout Standard

Example:
\layout Code

# /sbin/ifconfig eth0 up
\layout Code

# /sbin/ifconfig eth0 down
\layout Chapter


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{chapter-configuration-address}

\end_inset 

Configuring IPv6 addresses
\layout Standard
\align left 
There are different ways to configure an IPv6 address on an interface.
 You can use use "ifconfig" or "ip".
\layout Section

Displaying existing IPv6 addresses
\layout Standard
\align left 
First you should check, whether and which IPv6 addresses are already configured
 (perhaps auto-magically during stateless auto-configuration).
\layout Subsection

Using "ip"
\layout Standard

Usage:
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip -6 addr show dev <interface>
\layout Standard

Example for a static configured host:
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip -6 addr show dev eth0
\layout Code

2: eth0: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP&gt; mtu 1500 qdisc pfifo_ fast qlen 100
\layout Code

inet6 fe80::210:a4ff:fee3:9566/10 scope link
\layout Code

inet6 3ffe:ffff:0:f101::1/64 scope global
\layout Code

inet6 fec0:0:0:f101::1/64 scope site 
\layout Standard

Example for a host which is auto-configured
\layout Standard

Here you see some auto-magically configured IPv6 addresses and their lifetime.
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip -6 addr show dev eth0 
\layout Code

3: eth0: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,PROMISC,UP&gt; mtu 1500 qdisc pfifo_fast qlen
\layout Code

¬ 100 
\layout Code

inet6 2002:d950:f5f8:f101:2e0:18ff:fe90:9205/64 scope global dynamic 
\layout Code

valid_lft 16sec preferred_lft 6sec 
\layout Code

inet6 3ffe:400:100:f101:2e0:18ff:fe90:9205/64 scope global dynamic 
\layout Code

valid_lft 2591997sec preferred_lft 604797sec inet6 fe80::2e0:18ff:fe90:9205/10
\layout Code

¬ scope link
\layout Subsection

Using "ifconfig"
\layout Standard
\align left 
Usage:
\layout Code

# /sbin/ifconfig <interface>
\layout Standard

Example (output filtered with grep to display only IPv6 addresses).
 Here you see different IPv6 addresses with different scopes.
\layout Code

# /sbin/ifconfig eth0 |grep "inet6 addr:"
\layout Code

inet6 addr: fe80::210:a4ff:fee3:9566/10 Scope:Link
\layout Code

inet6 addr: 3ffe:ffff:0:f101::1/64 Scope:Global
\layout Code

inet6 addr: fec0:0:0:f101::1/64 Scope:Site
\layout Section

Add an IPv6 address
\layout Standard

Adding an IPv6 address is similar to the mechanism of "IP ALIAS" addresses
 in Linux IPv4 addressed interfaces.
\layout Subsection

Using "ip"
\layout Standard

Usage: 
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip -6 addr add <ipv6address>/<prefixlength> dev <interface> 
\layout Standard

Example:
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip -6 addr add 3ffe:ffff:0:f101::1/64 dev eth0 
\layout Subsection

Using "ifconfig"
\layout Standard
\align left 
Usage: 
\layout Code

# /sbin/ifconfig <interface> inet6 add <ipv6address>/<prefixlength>
\layout Standard

Example:
\layout Code

# /sbin/ifconfig eth0 inet6 add 3ffe:ffff:0:f101::1/64 
\layout Section

Removing an IPv6 address
\layout Standard
\align left 
Not so often needed, be carefully with removing non existent IPv6 address,
 sometimes using older kernels it results in a crash.
\layout Subsection

Using "ip"
\layout Standard

Usage: 
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip -6 addr del <ipv6address>/<prefixlength> dev <interface> 
\layout Standard

Example:
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip -6 addr del 3ffe:ffff:0:f101::1/64 dev eth0 
\layout Subsection

Using "ifconfig"
\layout Standard
\align left 
Usage:
\layout Code

# /sbin/ifconfig <interface> inet6 del <ipv6address>/<prefixlength>
\layout Standard

Example:
\layout Code

# /sbin/ifconfig eth0 inet6 del 3ffe:ffff:0:f101::1/64
\layout Chapter


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{chapter-configuration-route}

\end_inset 

Configuring normal IPv6 routes
\layout Standard
\align left 
If you want to leave your link and want to send packets in the world wide
 IPv6-Internet, you need routing.
 If there is already an IPv6 enabled router on your link, it's possible
 enough to add IPv6 routes.
\layout Standard
\align left 
Also here there are different ways to configure an IPv6 address on an interface.
 You can use use "ifconfig" or "ip"
\layout Section

Displaying existing IPv6 routes
\layout Standard
\align left 
First you should check, whether and which IPv6 addresses are already configured
 (perhaps auto-magically during auto-configuration).
\layout Subsection

Using "ip"
\layout Standard

Usage:
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip -6 route show [dev <device>]
\layout Standard
\align left 
Example:
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip -6 route show dev eth0
\layout Code

3ffe:ffff:0:f101::/64 proto kernel metric 256 mtu 1500 advmss 1440
\layout Code

fe80::/10             proto kernel metric 256 mtu 1500 advmss 1440
\layout Code

ff00::/8              proto kernel metric 256 mtu 1500 advmss 1440
\layout Code

default               proto kernel metric 256 mtu 1500 advmss 1440
\layout Subsection

Using "route"
\layout Standard
\align left 
Usage: 
\layout Code

# /sbin/route -A inet6 
\layout Standard
\align left 
Example (output is filtered for interface eth0).
 Here you see different IPv6 routes for different addresses on a single
 interface.
\layout Code

# /sbin/route -A inet6 |grep -w "eth0"
\layout Code

3ffe:ffff:0:f101 ::/64 :: UA  256 0 0 eth0 <- Interface route for global
\layout Code

¬ address
\layout Code

fe80::/10        ::       UA  256 0 0 eth0 <- Interface route for link-local
\layout Code

¬ address
\layout Code

ff00::/8         ::       UA  256 0 0 eth0 <- Interface route for all multicast
\layout Code

¬ addresses
\layout Code

::/0             ::       UDA 256 0 0 eth0 <- Automatic default route
\layout Section

Add an IPv6 route through a gateway
\layout Standard
\align left 
Mostly needed to reach the outside with IPv6 using an IPv6-enabled router
 on your link.
\layout Subsection

Using "ip"
\layout Standard

Usage:
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip -6 route add <ipv6network>/<prefixlength> via <ipv6address>
\layout Code

¬ [dev <device>]
\layout Standard

Example:
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip -6 route add 2000::/3 via 3ffe:ffff:0:f101::1
\layout Subsection

Using "route"
\layout Standard
\align left 
Usage: 
\layout Code

# /sbin/route -A inet6 add <ipv6network>/<prefixlength> gw
\layout Code

¬ <ipv6address> [dev <device>] 
\layout Standard
\align left 
A device can be needed, too, if the IPv6 address of the gateway is a link
 local one.
\layout Standard

Following shown example adds a route for all currently global addresses
 (2000::/3) through gateway 
\family typewriter 
\lang afrikaans
3ffe:ffff:0:f101::1
\layout Code

# /sbin/route -A inet6 add 2000::/3 gw 3ffe:ffff:0:f101::1
\layout Section

Removing an IPv6 route through a gateway
\layout Standard
\align left 
Not so often needed manually, mostly done by network configure scripts on
 shutdown (full or per interface)
\layout Subsection

Using "ip"
\layout Standard
\align left 
Usage:
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip -6 route del <ipv6network>/<prefixlength> via <ipv6address>
\layout Code

¬ [dev <device>]
\layout Standard

Example:
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip -6 route del 2000::/3 via 3ffe:ffff:0:f101::1
\layout Subsection

Using "route"
\layout Standard
\align left 
Usage: 
\layout Code

# /sbin/route -A inet6 del <network>/<prefixlength> [dev <device>]
\layout Standard

Example for removing upper added route again:
\layout Code

# /sbin/route -A inet6 del 2000::/3 gw 3ffe:ffff:0:f101::1
\layout Section

Add an IPv6 route through an interface
\layout Standard
\align left 
Not often needed, sometimes in cases of dedicated point-to-point links.
\layout Subsection

Using "ip"
\layout Standard
\align left 
Usage:
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip -6 route add <ipv6network>/<prefixlength> dev <device>
\layout Code

¬ metric 1
\layout Standard

Example:
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip -6 route add 2000::/3 dev eth0 metric 1
\layout Standard

Metric 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

1
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 is used here to be compatible with the metric used by route, because the
 default metric on using 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

ip
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 is 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

1024
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

.
\layout Subsection

Using "route"
\layout Standard
\align left 
Usage:
\layout Code

# /sbin/route -A inet6 add <network>/<prefixlength> dev <device>
\layout Standard

Example:
\layout Code

# /sbin/route -A inet6 add 2000::/3 dev eth0 
\layout Section

Removing an IPv6 route through an interface
\layout Standard
\align left 
Not so often needed to use by hand, configuration scripts will use such
 on shutdown.
\layout Subsection

Using "ip"
\layout Standard

Usage:
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip -6 route del <ipv6network>/<prefixlength> dev <device>
\layout Standard

Example:
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip -6 route del 2000::/3 dev eth0 
\layout Subsection

Using "route"
\layout Standard
\align left 
Usage:
\layout Code

# /sbin/route -A inet6 del <network>/<prefixlength> dev <device>
\layout Standard
\align left 
Example:
\layout Code

# /sbin/route -A inet6 del 2000::/3 dev eth0
\layout Section

FAQ for IPv6 routes
\layout Subsection

Support of an IPv6 default route
\layout Standard

One idea of IPv6 was a hierachical routing, therefore only less routing
 entries are needed in routers.
\layout Standard

There are some issues in current Linux kernels:
\layout Subsubsection

Clients (not routing any packet!)
\layout Standard

Client can setup a default route like prefix 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

::/0
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

, they also learn such route on autoconfiguration e.g.
 using radvd on the link like following example shows:
\layout Code

# ip -6 route show | grep ^default
\layout Code

default via fe80::212:34ff:fe12:3450 dev eth0 proto kernel metric 1024 expires
\layout Code

¬ 29sec mtu 1500 advmss 1440
\layout Subsubsection

Routers on packet forwarding
\layout Standard

Current mainstream Linux kernel (at least <= 2.4.17) don't support default
 routes.
 You can set them up, but the route lookup fails when a packet should be
 forwarded (normal intention of a router).
\layout Standard

Therefore at this time 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

default routing
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 can be setup using the currently only global address prefix 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

2000::/3
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

.
\layout Standard

The USAGI project already supports this in their extension with a hack.
\layout Standard

Note: take care about default routing without address filtering on edge
 routers.
 Otherwise unwanted multicast or site-local traffic leave the edge.
\layout Chapter


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{chapter-Neighbor-Discovery}

\end_inset 

Neighbor Discovery
\layout Standard

Neighbor discovery was the IPv6 successor for the ARP (Address Resolution
 Protocol) in IPv4.
 You can retrieve information about the current neighbors, in addition you
 can set and delete entries.
\layout Standard

Neighbor detection
\layout Standard

The kernel keeps tracking of successful neighbor detection (like ARP in
 IPv4).
 You can dig into the learnt table using 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

ip
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

.
\layout Section

Displaying neighbors using 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

ip
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 


\layout Standard

With following command you can display the learnt or configured IPv6 neighbors
\layout Code

# ip -6 neigh show [dev <device>]
\layout Standard

The following example shows one neighbor, which is a reachable router
\layout Code

# ip -6 neigh show
\layout Code

fe80::201:23ff:fe45:6789 dev eth0 lladdr 00:01:23:45:67:89 router nud reachable
\layout Section

Manipulating neighbors table using 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

ip
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 


\layout Subsection

Manually add an entry
\layout Standard

With following command you are able to manually add an entry
\layout Code

# ip -6 neigh add <IPv6 address> lladdr <link-layer address> dev <device>
\layout Standard

Example:
\layout Code

# ip -6 neigh add fec0::1 lladdr 02:01:02:03:04:05 dev eth0
\layout Subsection

Manually delete an entry
\layout Standard

Like adding also an entry can be deleted:
\layout Code

# ip -6 neigh del <IPv6 address> lladdr <link-layer address> dev <device>
\layout Standard

Example:
\layout Code

# ip -6 neigh del fec0::1 lladdr 02:01:02:03:04:05 dev eth0
\layout Subsection

More advanced settings
\layout Standard

The tool 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

ip
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 is less documentated, but very strong.
 See online 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

help
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 for more:
\layout Code

# ip -6 neigh help
\layout Code

Usage: ip neigh { add | del | change | replace } { ADDR [ lladdr LLADDR
 ] 
\layout Code

          [ nud { permanent | noarp | stale | reachable } ] 
\layout Code

          | proxy ADDR } [ dev DEV ] 
\layout Code

       ip neigh {show|flush} [ to PREFIX ] [ dev DEV ] [ nud STATE ]
\layout Standard

Looks like some options are only for IPv4...if you can contribute information
 about flags and advanced usage, pls.
 send.
\layout Chapter


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{chapter-configuring-ipv6-in-ipv4-tunnels}

\end_inset 

Configuring IPv6-in-IPv4 tunnels
\layout Standard
\align left 
If you want to leave your link you have no IPv6 capable network around you,
 you need IPv6-in-IPv4 tunneling to reach the World Wide IPv6-Internet.
\layout Standard
\align left 
There are some kind of tunnel mechanism and also some possibilities to setup
 tunnels.
\layout Section

Types of tunnels
\layout Standard

There are more than one possibility to tunnel IPv6 packets over IPv4-only
 links.
\layout Subsection

Static point-to-point tunneling: 6bone
\layout Standard
\align left 
A point-to-point tunnel is a dedicated tunnel to an endpoint, which knows
 about your IPv6 network (for backward routing) and the IPv4 address of
 your tunnel endpoint and defined in 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[RFC 2893 / Transition Mechanisms for IPv6 Hosts and Routers]{http://rfc.net/rfc2893.html}

\end_inset 

.
 Requirements:
\layout Itemize
\align left 
IPv4 address of your local tunnel endpoint must be static, global unique
 and reachable from the foreign tunnel endpoint
\layout Itemize
\align left 
A global IPv6 prefix assigned to you (see 6bone registry)
\layout Itemize
\align left 
A foreign tunnel endpoint which is capable to route your IPv6 prefix to
 your local tunnel endpoint (mostly remote manual configuration required)
\layout Subsection

Automatically tunneling
\layout Standard

Automatic tunneling occurs, when a node directly connects another node gotten
 the IPv4 address of the other node before.
\layout Subsection


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{tunneling-6to4}

\end_inset 

6to4-Tunneling
\layout Standard

6to4 tunneling (
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[RFC 3056 / Connection of IPv6 Domains via IPv4 Clouds]{http://rfc.net/rfc3056.html}

\end_inset 

) uses a simple mechanism to create automatic tunnels.
 Each node with a global unique IPv4 address is able to be a 6to4 tunnel
 endpoint (if no IPv4 firewall prohibits traffic).
 6to4 tunneling is mostly not a one-to-one tunnel.
 This case of tunneling can be divided into upstream and downstream tunneling.
 Also, a special IPv6 address indicates that this node will use 6to4 tunneling
 for connecting the world-wide IPv6 network
\layout Subsubsection

Generation of 6to4 prefix
\layout Standard

The 6to4 address is defined like following (schema is taken from 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[RFC 3056 / Connection of IPv6 Domains via IPv4 Clouds]{http://rfc.net/rfc3056.html}

\end_inset 

):
\layout Code

|   3+13   |    32     |    16  |            64 bits             | 
\layout Code

+---+------+-----------+--------+--------------------------------+ 
\layout Code

|  FP+TLA  |  V4ADDR   | SLA ID |           Interface ID         | 
\layout Code

|  0x2002  |           |        |                                | 
\layout Code

+---+------+-----------+--------+--------------------------------+
\layout Standard

Where FP is the known prefix for global addresses, TLA is the top level
 aggregator.
 V4ADDR is the node's global unique IPv4 address (in hexadecimal notation).
 SLA is the subnet identifier (65536 local subnets possible).
\layout Standard

Such prefix is generated and normally using SLA 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

0000
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 and suffix 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

::1
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 assigned to the 6to4 tunnel interface.
\layout Subsubsection

6to4 upstream tunneling
\layout Standard

The node has to know to which foreign tunnel endpoint its in IPv4 packed
 IPv6 packets should be send to.
 In 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

early
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 days of 6to4 tunneling, dedicated upstream accepting routers were defined.
 See  
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[NSayer's 6to4 information]{http://www.kfu.com/~nsayer/6to4/}

\end_inset 

 for a list of routers.
\layout Standard

Nowadays, 6to4 upstream routers can be found auto-magically using the anycast
 address 192.88.99.1.
 In the background routing protocols handle this, see 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[RFC 3068 / An Anycast Prefix for 6to4 Relay Routers]{http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc3068.html}

\end_inset 

 for details.
 
\layout Subsubsection

6to4 downstream tunneling
\layout Standard

The downstream (6bone -> your 6to4 enabled node) is not really fix and can
 vary from foreign host which originated packets were send to.
 There exist two possibilities:
\layout Itemize

Foreign host uses uses 6to4 and sends packet direct back to your node (see
 below)
\layout Itemize

Foreign host sends packets back to the world-wide IPv6 network and depending
 on the dynamic routing a relay router create a automatic tunnel back to
 your node.
\layout Subsubsection

Possible 6to4 traffic
\layout Itemize

from 6to4 to 6to4: is normally directly tunneled between the both 6to4 enabled
 hosts
\layout Itemize

from 6to4 to non-6to4: is sent via upstream tunneling
\layout Itemize

non-6to4 to 6to4: is sent via downstream tunneling
\layout Section

Displaying existing tunnels
\layout Subsection

Using "ip"
\layout Standard

Usage:
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip -6 tunnel show [<device>]
\layout Standard

Example:
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip -6 tunnel show 
\layout Code

sit0: ipv6/ip remote any local any ttl 64 nopmtudisc 
\layout Code

sit1: ipv6/ip remote 195.226.187.50 local any ttl 64
\layout Subsection

Using "route"
\layout Standard

Usage:
\layout Code

# /sbin/route -A inet6 
\layout Standard

Example (output is filtered to display only tunnels through virtual interface
 sit0):
\layout Code

# /sbin/route -A inet6 | grep "
\backslash 
Wsit0
\backslash 
W*$" 
\layout Code

::/96      ::               U   256  2  0  sit0 
\layout Code

2002::/16  ::               UA  256  0  0  sit0 
\layout Code

2000::/3   ::193.113.58.75  UG    1  0  0  sit0 
\layout Code

fe80::/10  ::               UA  256  0  0  sit0 
\layout Code

ff00::/8   ::               UA  256  0  0  sit0
\layout Section


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{conf-ipv6-in-ipv4-point-to-point-tunnels}

\end_inset 

Setup of point-to-point tunnel
\layout Standard
\align left 
There are 3 possibilities to add or remove point-to-point tunnels.
\layout Subsection

Add point-to-point tunnels
\layout Subsubsection

Using "ip"
\layout Standard
\align left 
Common method at the moment for a small amount of tunnels
\layout Standard

Usage for creating a tunnel device (but it's not up afterward, also a TTL
 must be specified because the default value is 0).
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip tunnel add <device> mode sit ttl <ttldefault> remote
\layout Code

¬ <ipv4addressofforeigntunnel> local <ipv4addresslocal>
\layout Standard

Usage (generic example for three tunnels):
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip tunnel add sit1 mode sit ttl <ttldefault> remote
\layout Code

¬ <ipv4addressofforeigntunnel1> local <ipv4addresslocal>
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip set dev sit1 up
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip -6 route add <prefixtoroute1> dev sit1 metric 1
\layout Code

\layout Code

# /sbin/ip tunnel add sit2 mode sit ttl <ttldefault>
\layout Code

¬ <ipv4addressofforeigntunnel2> local <ipv4addresslocal>
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip set dev sit2 up
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip -6 route add <prefixtoroute2> dev sit2 metric 1
\layout Code

\layout Code

# /sbin/ip tunnel add sit3 mode sit ttl <ttldefault>
\layout Code

¬ <ipv4addressofforeigntunnel3> local <ipv4addresslocal>
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip set dev sit3 up
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip -6 route add <prefixtoroute3> dev sit3 metric 1
\layout Subsubsection

Using "ifconfig" and "route" (deprecated)
\layout Standard
\align left 
This not very recommended way to add a tunnel because it's a little bit
 strange.
 No problem if adding only one, but if you setup more than one, you cannot
 easy shutdown the first ones and leave the others running.
\layout Standard

Usage (generic example for three tunnels):
\layout Code

# /sbin/ifconfig sit0 up
\layout Code

\layout Code

# /sbin/ifconfig sit0 tunnel <ipv4addressofforeigntunnel1>
\layout Code

# /sbin/ifconfig sit1 up
\layout Code

# /sbin/route -A inet6 add <prefixtoroute1> dev sit1
\layout Code

\layout Code

# /sbin/ifconfig sit0 tunnel <ipv4addressofforeigntunnel2>
\layout Code

# /sbin/ifconfig sit2 up
\layout Code

# /sbin/route -A inet6 add <prefixtoroute2> dev sit2
\layout Code

\layout Code

# /sbin/ifconfig sit0 tunnel <ipv4addressofforeigntunnel3>
\layout Code

# /sbin/ifconfig sit3 up
\layout Code

# /sbin/route -A inet6 add <prefixtoroute3> dev sit3
\layout Standard

Important: DON'T USE THIS, because this setup implicit enable "automatic
 tunneling" from anywhere in the Internet, this is a risk, and it should
 not be advocated.
\layout Subsubsection

Using "route" only
\layout Standard
\align left 
It's also possible to setup tunnels in Non Broadcast Multiple Access (NBMA)
 style, it's a easy way to add many tunnels at once.
 But none of the tunnel can be numbered (which is a not required feature).
\layout Standard

Usage (generic example for three tunnels):
\layout Code

# /sbin/ifconfig sit0 up
\layout Code

\layout Code

# /sbin/route -A inet6 add <prefixtoroute1> gw
\layout Code

¬ ::<ipv4addressofforeigntunnel1> dev sit0
\layout Code

# /sbin/route -A inet6 add <prefixtoroute2> gw
\layout Code

¬ ::<ipv4addressofforeigntunnel2> dev sit0
\layout Code

# /sbin/route -A inet6 add <prefixtoroute3> gw
\layout Code

¬ ::<ipv4addressofforeigntunnel3> dev sit0
\layout Standard

Important: DON'T USE THIS, because this setup implicit enable "automatic
 tunneling" from anywhere in the Internet, this is a risk, and it should
 not be advocated.
\layout Subsection

Removing point-to-point tunnels
\layout Standard
\align left 
Manually not so often needed, but used by scripts for clean shutdown or
 restart of IPv6 configuration.
\layout Subsubsection

Using "ip"
\layout Standard

Usage for removing a tunnel device:
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip tunnel del <device>
\layout Standard

Usage (generic example for three tunnels):
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip -6 route del <prefixtoroute1> dev sit1
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip set sit1 down
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip tunnel del sit
\series bold 
1
\layout Code

\layout Code

# /sbin/ip -6 route del <prefixtoroute2> dev sit2
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip set sit2 down
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip tunnel del sit2
\layout Code

\layout Code

# /sbin/ip -6 route del <prefixtoroute3> dev sit3
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip set sit3 down
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip tunnel del sit3
\layout Subsubsection

Using "ifconfig" and "route" (deprecated because not very funny)
\layout Standard
\align left 
Not only the creation is strange, the shutdown also...you have to remove the
 tunnels in backorder, means the latest created must be removed first.
\layout Standard

Usage (generic example for three tunnels):
\layout Code

# /sbin/route -A inet6 del <prefixtoroute3> dev sit3
\layout Code

# /sbin/ifconfig sit3 down
\layout Code

\layout Code

# /sbin/route -A inet6 del <prefixtoroute2> dev sit2
\layout Code

# /sbin/ifconfig sit2 down
\layout Code

\layout Code

# /sbin/route -A inet6 add <prefixtoroute1> dev sit1
\layout Code

# /sbin/ifconfig sit1 down
\layout Code

\layout Code

# /sbin/ifconfig sit0 down
\layout Code

\layout Subsubsection

Using "route"
\layout Standard

This is like removing normal IPv6 routes
\layout Standard
\align left 
Usage (generic example for three tunnels):
\layout Code

# /sbin/route -A inet6 del <prefixtoroute1> gw
\layout Code

¬ ::<ipv4addressofforeigntunnel1> dev sit0
\layout Code

# /sbin/route -A inet6 del <prefixtoroute2> gw
\layout Code

¬ ::<ipv4addressofforeigntunnel2> dev sit0
\layout Code

# /sbin/route -A inet6 del <prefixtoroute3> gw
\layout Code

¬ ::<ipv4addressofforeigntunnel3> dev sit0
\layout Code

\layout Code

# /sbin/ifconfig sit0 down
\layout Subsection

Numbered point-to-point tunnels
\layout Standard

Sometimes it's needed to configure a point-to-point tunnel with IPv6 addresses
 like in IPv4 today.
 This is only possible with the first (ifconfig+route - deprecated) and
 third (ip+route) tunnel setup.
 In such cases, you can add the IPv6 address to the tunnel interface like
 shown on interface configuration.
 
\layout Section


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{configuring-ipv6to4-tunnels}

\end_inset 

Setup of 6to4 tunnels
\layout Standard

Pay attention that the support of 6to4 tunnels currently lacks on vanilla
 kernel series 2.2.x (see 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref[systemcheck/kernel]{systemcheck-kernel}

\end_inset 

 for more information).
 Also note that that the prefix length for a 6to4 address is 16 because
 of from network point of view, all other 6to4 enabled hosts are on the
 same layer 2.
\layout Subsection

Add a 6to4 tunnel
\layout Standard

First, you have to calculate your 6to4 prefix using your local assigned
 global routable IPv4 address (if your host has no global routable IPv4
 address, in special cases NAT on border gateways is possible):
\layout Standard

Assuming your IPv4 address is 
\layout Code

1.2.3.4
\layout Standard

the generated 6to4 prefix will be
\layout Code

2002:0102:0304::
\layout Standard

Local 6to4 gateways should always assigned the manual suffix 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

::1
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

, therefore your local 6to4 address will be
\layout Code

2002:0102:0304::1
\layout Standard

Use e.g.
 following for automatic generation:
\layout Code

ipv4="1.2.3.4"; printf "2002:%02x%02x:%02x%02x::1" `echo $ipv4 | tr "." " "`
\layout Standard

There are two ways possible to setup 6to4 tunneling now.
\layout Subsubsection

Using "ip" and a dedicated tunnel device
\layout Standard

This is now the recommended way.
\layout Standard

Create a new tunnel device
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip tunnel add tun6to4 mode sit remote any local <localipv4address>
 
\layout Standard

Bring interface up
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip link set dev tun6to4 up 
\layout Standard

Add local 6to4 address to interface (note: prefix length 16 is imporant!)
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip -6 addr add <local6to4address>/16 dev tun6to4 
\layout Standard

Add (default) route to the global IPv6 network using the all-6to4-routers
 IPv4 anycast address
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip -6 route add 2000::/3 via ::192.88.99.1 dev tun6to4 metric 1
\layout Subsubsection

Using "ifconfig" and "route" and generic tunnel device 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

sit0
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 (deprecated)
\layout Standard

This is now deprecated because using the generic tunnel device sit0 doesn't
 let specify filtering per device.
\layout Standard

Bring generic tunnel interface sit0 up
\layout Code

# /sbin/ifconfig sit0 up 
\layout Standard

Add local 6to4 address to interface
\layout Code

# /sbin/ifconfig sit0 add <local6to4address>/16
\layout Standard

Add (default) route to the global IPv6 network using the all-6to4-relays
 IPv4 anycast address
\layout Code

# /sbin/route -A inet6 add 2000::/3 gw ::192.88.99.1 dev sit0
\layout Subsection

Remove a 6to4 tunnel
\layout Subsubsection

Using "ip" and a dedicated tunnel device
\layout Standard

Remove all routes through this dedicated tunnel device
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip -6 route flush dev tun6to4
\layout Standard

Shut down interface
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip link set dev tun6to4 down
\layout Standard

Remove created tunnel device
\layout Code

# /sbin/ip tunnel del tun6to4 
\layout Subsubsection

Using 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

ifconfig
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

route
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 and generic tunnel device 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

sit0
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 (deprecated)
\layout Standard

Remove (default) route through the 6to4 tunnel interface
\layout Code

# /sbin/route -A inet6 del 2000::/3 gw ::192.88.99.1 dev sit0
\layout Standard

Remove local 6to4 address to interface
\layout Code

# /sbin/ifconfig sit0 del <local6to4address>/16
\layout Standard

Shut down generic tunnel device (take care about this, perhaps it's still
 in use...)
\layout Code

# /sbin/ifconfig sit0 down 
\layout Chapter


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{chapter-configuring-ipv4-in-ipv6-tunnels}

\end_inset 

Configuring IPv4-in-IPv6 tunnels
\layout Standard
\align left 
This will be filled in the future.
 At the moment, such tunnels are more used in test environments.
\layout Standard

More information in the meantime: 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[RFC 2473 / Generic Packet Tunneling in IPv6 Specification]{http://rfc.net/rfc2473.html}

\end_inset 


\layout Chapter


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{chapter-kernel-settings}

\end_inset 


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{proc-filesystem}

\end_inset 

Kernel settings in /proc-filesystem
\layout Standard

Note: the source of this section is mostly the file 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

ip-sysctl.txt
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 which is included in current kernel sources in directory 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

Documentation/networking
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

.
 Credits to Pekka Savola for maintaining the IPv6-related part in this file.
 Also some text is more or less copied & pasted into this document.
\layout Section

How to access the /proc-filesystem
\layout Subsection

Using 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

cat
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

echo
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Using 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

cat
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

echo
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 is the simplest way to access the /proc filesystem, but two requirements
 are needed for that
\layout Itemize

The /proc-filesystem had to be enabled in kernel, means on compiling following
 switch has to be set
\layout Code

CONFIG_PROC_FS=y
\layout Itemize

The /proc-filesystem was mounted before, which can be tested using
\layout Code

# mount | grep "type proc"
\layout Code

none on /proc type proc (rw)
\layout Itemize

You need read and sometimes also write access (normally root only) to the
 /proc-filesystem
\layout Standard

Normally, only entries in /proc/sys/* are writable, the others are readonly
 and for information retrieving only.
\layout Subsubsection

Retrieving a value
\layout Standard

The value of an entry can be retrieved using 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

cat
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

:
\layout Code

# cat /proc/sys/net/ipv6/conf/all/forwarding
\layout Code

0
\layout Subsubsection

Setting a value
\layout Standard

A new value can be set (if entry is writable) using 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

echo
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

:
\layout Code

# echo "1" >/proc/sys/net/ipv6/conf/all/forwarding
\layout Subsection

Using 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

sysctl
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Using the 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

sysctl
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 program to access the kernel switches is a modern method today.
 You can use it also, if the /proc-filesystem isn't mounted.
 But you have only access to /proc/sys/*!
\layout Standard

The program 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

sysctl
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 is included in package 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

procps
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 (on Red Hat Linux systems).
\layout Itemize

The sysctl-interface had to be enabled in kernel, means on compiling following
 switch has to be set
\layout Code

CONFIG_SYSCTL=y
\layout Subsubsection

Retrieving a value
\layout Standard

The value of an entry can be retrieved now:
\layout Code

# sysctl net.ipv6.conf.all.forwarding
\layout Code

net.ipv6.conf.all.forwarding = 0
\layout Subsubsection

Setting a value
\layout Standard

A new value can be set (if entry is writable):
\layout Code

# sysctl -w net.ipv6.conf.all.forwarding=1
\layout Code

net.ipv6.conf.all.forwarding = 1
\layout Standard

Note: Don't use spaces around the 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

=
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 on setting values.
 Also on multiple values per line, quote them like e.g.
\layout Code

# sysctl -w net.ipv4.ip_local_port_range=
\series bold 
"
\series default 
32768 61000
\series bold 
"
\layout Code

net.ipv4.ip_local_port_range = 32768 61000
\layout Subsubsection

Additionals
\layout Standard

Note: There are sysctl versions in the wild which displaying 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

/
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 instead of the 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

.
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 


\layout Standard

For more details take a look into sysctl's manpage.
\layout Standard

Hint: for digging fast into the settings, use the option 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

-a
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 (display all entries) in conjunction with 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

grep
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 


\layout Subsection

Values found in /proc-filesystems
\layout Standard

There are several formats seen in /proc-filesystem:
\layout Itemize

BOOLEAN: simple a 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

0
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 (false) or a 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

1
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 (true)
\layout Itemize

INTEGER: an integer value, can be unsigned, too
\layout Itemize

more sophisticated lines with several values: sometimes a header line is
 displayed also, if not, have a look into the kernel source to retrieve
 information about the meaning of each value...
\layout Section


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{proc-sys-net-ipv6}

\end_inset 

Entries in /proc/sys/net/ipv6/
\layout Subsection

conf/default/*
\layout Standard

Change the interface-specific default settings.
\layout Subsection

conf/all/*
\layout Standard

Change all the interface-specific settings.
\layout Standard

Exception: 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

conf/all/forwarding
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 has a different meaning here
\layout Subsubsection

conf/all/forwarding
\layout Itemize

Type: BOOLEAN
\layout Standard

This enables global IPv6 forwarding between all interfaces.
\layout Standard

In IPv6 you can't control forwarding per device, forwarding control has
 to be done using IPv6-netfilter (controlled with ip6tables) rulesets and
 specify input and output devices (see 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref[Firewalling/Netfilter6]{firewalling-netfilter6}

\end_inset 

 for more).
 This is different to IPv4, where you are able to control forwarding per
 device (decission is made on interface where packet came in).
\layout Standard

This also sets all interfaces' Host/Router setting 'forwarding' to the specified
 value.
 See below for details.
 This referred to as global forwarding.
\layout Standard

If this value is 0, no IPv6 forwarding is enabled, packets never leave another
 interface, neither physical nor logical like e.g.
 tunnels.
\layout Subsection

conf/interface/*
\layout Standard

Change special settings per interface.
\layout Standard

The functional behaviour for certain settings is different depending on
 whether local forwarding is enabled or not.
\layout Subsubsection

accept_ra
\layout Itemize

Type: BOOLEAN
\layout Itemize

Functional default: enabled if local forwarding is disabled.
 disabled if local forwarding is enabled.
\layout Standard

Accept Router Advertisements, and autoconfigure this interface with received
 data.
\layout Subsubsection

accept_redirectsc
\layout Itemize

Type: BOOLEAN
\layout Itemize

Functional default: enabled if local forwarding is disabled.
 disabled if local forwarding is enabled.
\layout Standard

Accept Redirects sent by an IPv6 router.
\layout Subsubsection

autoconf
\layout Itemize

Type: BOOLEAN
\layout Itemize

Default: TRUE
\layout Standard

Configure link-local addresses (see also 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref[Addresstypes]{chapter-addresstypes}

\end_inset 

) using L2 hardware addresses.
 E.g.
 this generates automagically an address like 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

fe80::201:23ff:fe45:6789
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 on an interface with a L2-MAC address.
\layout Subsubsection

dad_transmits
\layout Itemize

Type: INTEGER
\layout Itemize

Default: 1
\layout Standard

The amount of Duplicate Address Detection probes to send.
\layout Subsubsection

forwarding
\layout Itemize

Type: BOOLEAN
\layout Itemize

Default: FALSE if global forwarding is disabled (default), otherwise TRUE
\layout Standard

Configure interface-specific Host/Router behaviour.
\layout Standard

Note: It is recommended to have the same setting on all interfaces; mixed
 router/host scenarios are rather uncommon.
\layout Itemize

Value FALSE: By default, Host behaviour is assumed.
 This means:
\layout Enumerate

IsRouter flag is not set in Neighbour Advertisements.
\layout Enumerate

Router Solicitations are being sent when necessary.
\layout Enumerate

If accept_ra is TRUE (default), accept Router Advertisements (and do autoconfigu
ration).
\layout Enumerate

If accept_redirects is TRUE (default), accept Redirects.
\layout Itemize

Value TRUE: If local forwarding is enabled, Router behaviour is assumed.
 This means exactly the reverse from the above:
\layout Enumerate

IsRouter flag is set in Neighbour Advertisements.
\layout Enumerate

Router Solicitations are not sent.
\layout Enumerate

Router Advertisements are ignored.
\layout Enumerate

Redirects are ignored.
\layout Subsubsection

hop_limit
\layout Itemize

Type: INTEGER
\layout Itemize

Default: 64
\layout Standard

Default Hop Limit to set.
\layout Subsubsection

mtu
\layout Itemize

Type: INTEGER
\layout Itemize

Default: 1280 (IPv6 required minimum)
\layout Standard

Default Maximum Transfer Unit
\layout Subsubsection

router_solicitation_delay
\layout Itemize

Type: INTEGER
\layout Itemize

Default: 1
\layout Standard

Number of seconds to wait after interface is brought up before sending Router
 Solicitations.
\layout Subsubsection

router_solicitation_interval
\layout Itemize

Type: INTEGER
\layout Itemize

Default: 4
\layout Standard

Number of seconds to wait between Router Solicitations.
 
\layout Subsubsection

router_solicitations
\layout Itemize

Type: INTEGER
\layout Itemize

Default: 3
\layout Standard

Number of Router Solicitations to send until assuming no routers are present.
\layout Subsection

neigh/default/*
\layout Standard

Change default settings for neighbor detection and some special global interval
 and threshold values:
\layout Subsubsection

gc_thresh1
\layout Itemize

Type: INTEGER
\layout Itemize

Default: 128
\layout Standard

More to be filled.
\layout Subsubsection

gc_thresh2
\layout Itemize

Type: INTEGER
\layout Itemize

Default: 512
\layout Standard

More to be filled.
\layout Subsubsection

gc_thresh3
\layout Itemize

Type: INTEGER
\layout Itemize

Default: 1024
\layout Standard

Tuning parameter for neighbour table size.
\layout Standard

Increase this value if you have a lot of interfaces and problem with routes
 start to act mysteriously and fail.
 Or if a running Zebra (routing daemon) reports:
\layout Code

ZEBRA: netlink-listen error: No buffer space available, type=RTM_NEWROUTE(24),
 seq=426, pid=0
\layout Subsubsection

gc_interval
\layout Itemize

Type: INTEGER
\layout Itemize

Default: 30
\layout Standard

More to be filled.
\layout Subsection

neigh/interface/*
\layout Standard

Change special settings per interface for neighbor detection.
\layout Subsubsection

anycast_delay
\layout Itemize

Type: INTEGER
\layout Itemize

Default: 100
\layout Standard

More to be filled.
\layout Subsubsection

gc_stale_time
\layout Itemize

Type: INTEGER
\layout Itemize

Default: 60
\layout Standard

More to be filled.
\layout Subsubsection

proxy_qlen
\layout Itemize

Type: INTEGER
\layout Itemize

Default: 64
\layout Standard

More to be filled.
\layout Subsubsection

unres_qlen
\layout Itemize

Type: INTEGER
\layout Itemize

Default: 3
\layout Standard

More to be filled.
\layout Subsubsection

app_solicit
\layout Itemize

Type: INTEGER
\layout Itemize

Default: 0
\layout Standard

More to be filled.
\layout Subsubsection

locktime
\layout Itemize

Type: INTEGER
\layout Itemize

Default: 0
\layout Standard

More to be filled.
\layout Subsubsection

retrans_time
\layout Itemize

Type: INTEGER
\layout Itemize

Default: 100
\layout Standard

More to be filled.
\layout Subsubsection

base_reachable_time
\layout Itemize

Type: INTEGER
\layout Itemize

Default: 30
\layout Standard

More to be filled.
\layout Subsubsection

mcast_solicit
\layout Itemize

Type: INTEGER
\layout Itemize

Default: 3
\layout Standard

More to be filled.
\layout Subsubsection

ucast_solicit
\layout Itemize

Type: INTEGER
\layout Itemize

Default: 3
\layout Standard

More to be filled
\layout Subsubsection

delay_first_probe_time
\layout Itemize

Type: INTEGER
\layout Itemize

Default: 5
\layout Standard

More to be filled.
\layout Subsubsection

proxy_delay
\layout Itemize

Type: INTEGER
\layout Itemize

Default: 80
\layout Standard

More to be filled.
\layout Subsection

route/*
\layout Standard

Change global settings for routing
\layout Subsubsection

flush
\layout Standard

Removed in newer kernel releases - more to be filled.
\layout Subsubsection

gc_interval
\layout Itemize

Type: INTEGER
\layout Itemize

Default: 30
\layout Standard

More to be filled.
\layout Subsubsection

gc_thresh
\layout Itemize

Type: INTEGER
\layout Itemize

Default: 1024
\layout Standard

More to be filled.
\layout Subsubsection

mtu_expires
\layout Itemize

Type: INTEGER
\layout Itemize

Default: 600
\layout Standard

More to be filled.
\layout Subsubsection

gc_elasticity
\layout Itemize

Type: INTEGER
\layout Itemize

Default: 0
\layout Standard

More to be filled.
\layout Subsubsection

gc_min_interval
\layout Itemize

Type: INTEGER
\layout Itemize

Default: 5
\layout Standard

More to be filled.
\layout Subsubsection

gc_timeout
\layout Itemize

Type: INTEGER
\layout Itemize

Default: 60
\layout Standard

More to be filled.
\layout Subsubsection

min_adv_mss
\layout Itemize

Type: INTEGER
\layout Itemize

Default: 12
\layout Standard

More to be filled.
\layout Subsubsection

max_size
\layout Itemize

Type: INTEGER
\layout Itemize

Default: 4096
\layout Standard

More to be filled.
\layout Subsubsection

max_size
\layout Itemize

Type: INTEGER
\layout Itemize

Default: 4096
\layout Standard

More to be filled.
\layout Section


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{proc-sys-net-ipv4}

\end_inset 

IPv6-related entries in /proc/sys/net/ipv4/
\layout Standard

At the moment (and this will be until IPv4 is completly converted to an
 independend kernel module) some switches are also used here for IPv6.
\layout Subsection

ip_*
\layout Subsubsection

ip_local_port_range
\layout Standard

This control setting is used by IPv6 also.
\layout Subsection

tcp_*
\layout Standard

This control settings are used by IPv6 also.
\layout Subsection

icmp_*
\layout Standard

This control settings are not used by IPv6.
 To enable ICMPv6 rate limting (which is very recommended because of the
 capability of ICMPv6 storms) netfilter-v6 rules must be used.
\layout Subsection

others
\layout Standard

Unknown, but probably not used by IPv6.
\layout Section


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{proc-net}

\end_inset 

IPv6-related entries in /proc/net/
\layout Standard

In /proc/net there are several read-only entries available.
 You cannot retrieve information using 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

sysctl
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 here, so use e.g.
 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

cat
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

.
\layout Subsection

if_inet6
\layout Itemize

Type: One line per addresss containing multiple values
\layout Standard

Here all configured IPv6 addresses are shown in a special format.
 The example displays for loopback interface only.
 The meaning is shown below (see 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

net/ipv6/addrconf.c
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 for more)
\layout Code

# cat /proc/net/if_inet6
\layout Code

00000000000000000000000000000001 01 80 10 80 lo
\layout Code

+------------------------------+ ++ ++ ++ ++ ++
\layout Code

|                                |  |  |  |  |
\layout Code

1                                2  3  4  5  6
\layout Enumerate

IPv6 address displayed in 32 hexadecimal chars without colons as separator
\layout Enumerate

Netlink device number (interface index) in hexadecimal (see 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

ip addr
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 , too)
\layout Enumerate

Prefix length in hexadecimal
\layout Enumerate

Scope value (see kernel source 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

 include/net/ipv6.h
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

net/ipv6/addrconf.c
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 for more)
\layout Enumerate

Interface flags (see 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

include/linux/rtnetlink.h
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

net/ipv6/addrconf.c
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 for more)
\layout Enumerate

Device name
\layout Subsection

ipv6_route
\layout Itemize

Type: One line per route containing multiple values
\layout Standard

Here all configured IPv6 routes are shown in a special format.
 The example displays for loopback interface only.
 The meaning is shown below (see 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

net/ipv6/route.c
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 for more)
\layout Code

# cat /proc/net/ipv6_route
\layout Code

00000000000000000000000000000000 00 00000000000000000000000000000000 00
\layout Code

+------------------------------+ ++ +------------------------------+ ++
\layout Code

|                                |  |                                |
\layout Code

1                                2  3                                4
\layout Code

\layout Code

¬ 00000000000000000000000000000000 ffffffff 00000001 00000001 00200200 lo
\layout Code

¬ +------------------------------+ +------+ +------+ +------+ +------+ ++
\layout Code

¬ |                                |        |        |        |        |
\layout Code

¬ 5                                6        7        8        9        10
\layout Enumerate

IPv6 destination network displayed in 32 hexadecimal chars without colons
 as separator
\layout Enumerate

IPv6 destination prefix length in hexadecimal
\layout Enumerate

IPv6 source network displayed in 32 hexadecimal chars without colons as
 separator
\layout Enumerate

IPv6 source prefix length in hexadecimal
\layout Enumerate

IPv6 next hop displayed in 32 hexadecimal chars without colons as separator
\layout Enumerate

Metric in hexadecimal
\layout Enumerate

Reference counter
\layout Enumerate

Use counter
\layout Enumerate

Flags
\layout Enumerate

Device name
\layout Subsection

sockstat6
\layout Itemize

Type: One line per protocol with description and value
\layout Standard

Statistics about used IPv6 sockets.
 Example:
\layout Code

# cat /proc/net/sockstat6
\layout Code

TCP6: inuse 7 
\layout Code

UDP6: inuse 2 
\layout Code

RAW6: inuse 1 
\layout Code

FRAG6: inuse 0 memory 0
\layout Subsection

tcp6
\layout Standard

To be filled.
\layout Subsection

udp6
\layout Standard

To be filled.
\layout Subsection

igmp6
\layout Standard

To be filled.
\layout Subsection

raw6
\layout Standard

To be filled.
\layout Subsection

ip6_flowlabel
\layout Standard

To be filled.
\layout Subsection

rt6_stats
\layout Standard

To be filled.
\layout Subsection

snmp6
\layout Itemize

Type: One line per SNMP description and value
\layout Standard

SNMP statistics, can be retrieved via SNMP server and related MIB table
 by network management software.
\layout Subsection

ip6_tables_names
\layout Standard

Available netfilter6 tables
\layout Chapter


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{netlink}

\end_inset 

Netlink-Interface to kernel
\layout Standard

To be filled...I have no experience with that...
\layout Chapter


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{network-debugging}

\end_inset 

Network debugging
\layout Section

Server socket binding
\layout Subsection

Using 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

netstat
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 for server socket binding check
\layout Standard

It's always interesting which server sockets are currently active on a node.
 Using 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

netstat
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 is a short way to get such information: 
\layout Standard

Used options: -nlptu
\layout Standard

Example:
\layout Code

# netstat -nlptu
\layout Code

Active Internet connections (only servers)
\layout Code

Proto Recv-Q Send-Q Local Address           Foreign Address         State
      
\layout Code

¬ PID/Program name
\layout Code

tcp        0      0 0.0.0.0:32768           0.0.0.0:*               LISTEN   
  
\layout Code

¬ 1258/rpc.statd
\layout Code

tcp        0      0 0.0.0.0:32769           0.0.0.0:*               LISTEN   
  
\layout Code

¬ 1502/rpc.mountd
\layout Code

tcp        0      0 0.0.0.0:515             0.0.0.0:*               LISTEN   
  
\layout Code

¬ 22433/lpd Waiting
\layout Code

tcp        0      0 1.2.3.1:139             0.0.0.0:*               LISTEN   
  
\layout Code

¬ 1746/smbd
\layout Code

tcp        0      0 0.0.0.0:111             0.0.0.0:*               LISTEN   
  
\layout Code

¬ 1230/portmap
\layout Code

tcp        0      0 0.0.0.0:6000            0.0.0.0:*               LISTEN   
  
\layout Code

¬ 3551/X
\layout Code

tcp        0      0 1.2.3.1:8081            0.0.0.0:*               LISTEN   
  
\layout Code

¬ 18735/junkbuster
\layout Code

tcp        0      0 1.2.3.1:3128            0.0.0.0:*               LISTEN   
  
\layout Code

¬ 18822/(squid)
\layout Code

tcp        0      0 127.0.0.1:953           0.0.0.0:*               LISTEN   
  
\layout Code

¬ 30734/named
\layout Code

tcp        0      0 ::ffff:1.2.3.1:993      :::*                    LISTEN
     
\layout Code

¬ 6742/xinetd-ipv6
\layout Code

tcp        0      0 :::13                   :::*                    LISTEN
     
\layout Code

¬ 6742/xinetd-ipv6
\layout Code

tcp        0      0 ::ffff:1.2.3.1:143      :::*                    LISTEN
     
\layout Code

¬ 6742/xinetd-ipv6
\layout Code

tcp        0      0 :::53                   :::*                    LISTEN
     
\layout Code

¬ 30734/named
\layout Code

tcp        0      0 :::22                   :::*                    LISTEN
     
\layout Code

¬ 1410/sshd
\layout Code

tcp        0      0 :::6010                 :::*                    LISTEN
     
\layout Code

¬ 13237/sshd
\layout Code

udp        0      0 0.0.0.0:32768           0.0.0.0:*                        
  
\layout Code

¬ 1258/rpc.statd
\layout Code

udp        0      0 0.0.0.0:2049            0.0.0.0:*                        
  
\layout Code

¬ -
\layout Code

udp        0      0 0.0.0.0:32770           0.0.0.0:*                        
  
\layout Code

¬ 1502/rpc.mountd
\layout Code

udp        0      0 0.0.0.0:32771           0.0.0.0:*                        
  
\layout Code

¬ -
\layout Code

udp        0      0 1.2.3.1:137             0.0.0.0:*                        
  
\layout Code

¬ 1751/nmbd
\layout Code

udp        0      0 0.0.0.0:137             0.0.0.0:*                        
  
\layout Code

¬ 1751/nmbd
\layout Code

udp        0      0 1.2.3.1:138             0.0.0.0:*                        
  
\layout Code

¬ 1751/nmbd
\layout Code

udp        0      0 0.0.0.0:138             0.0.0.0:*                        
  
\layout Code

¬ 1751/nmbd
\layout Code

udp        0      0 0.0.0.0:33044           0.0.0.0:*                        
  
\layout Code

¬ 30734/named
\layout Code

udp        0      0 1.2.3.1:53              0.0.0.0:*                        
  
\layout Code

¬ 30734/named
\layout Code

udp        0      0 127.0.0.1:53            0.0.0.0:*                        
  
\layout Code

¬ 30734/named
\layout Code

udp        0      0 0.0.0.0:67              0.0.0.0:*                        
  
\layout Code

¬ 1530/dhcpd
\layout Code

udp        0      0 0.0.0.0:67              0.0.0.0:*                        
  
\layout Code

¬ 1530/dhcpd
\layout Code

udp        0      0 0.0.0.0:32858           0.0.0.0:*                        
  
\layout Code

¬ 18822/(squid)
\layout Code

udp        0      0 0.0.0.0:4827            0.0.0.0:*                        
  
\layout Code

¬ 18822/(squid)
\layout Code

udp        0      0 0.0.0.0:111             0.0.0.0:*                        
  
\layout Code

¬ 1230/portmap
\layout Code

udp        0      0 :::53                   :::*                       
        
\layout Code

¬ 30734/named
\layout Section


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{examples-tcpdump}

\end_inset 

Examples for tcpdump packet dumps
\layout Standard

Here some examples of captured packets are shown, perhaps useful for your
 own debugging...
\layout Standard

...more coming next...
\layout Subsection

Router discovery
\layout Subsubsection

Router advertisement
\layout Code

15:43:49.484751 fe80::212:34ff:fe12:3450 > ff02::1: icmp6: router
\layout Code

¬ advertisement(chlim=64, router_ltime=30, reachable_time=0,
\layout Code

¬ retrans_time=0)(prefix info: AR valid_ltime=30, preffered_ltime=20,
\layout Code

¬ prefix=2002:0102:0304:1::/64)(prefix info: LAR valid_ltime=2592000,
\layout Code

¬ preffered_ltime=604800, prefix=3ffe:ffff:0:1::/64)(src lladdr:
\layout Code

¬ 0:12:34:12:34:50) (len 88, hlim 255)
\layout Standard

Router with link-local address 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

fe80::212:34ff:fe12:3450
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 send an advertisement to the all-node-on-link multicast address 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

ff02::1
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 containing two prefixes 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

2002:0102:0304:1::/64
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 (lifetime 30 s) and 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

3ffe:ffff:0:1::/64
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 (lifetime 2592000 s) including its own layer 2 MAC address 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

0:12:34:12:34:50
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 


\layout Subsubsection

Router solicitation
\layout Code

15:44:21.152646 fe80::212:34ff:fe12:3456 > ff02::2: icmp6: router solicitation
\layout Code

¬ (src lladdr: 0:12:34:12:34:56) (len 16, hlim 255)
\layout Standard

Node with link-local address 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

fe80::212:34ff:fe12:3456
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 and layer 2 MAC address 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

0:12:34:12:34:56
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 is looking for a router on-link, therefore sending this solicitation to
 the all-router-on-link multicast address 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

ff02::2
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

.
\layout Subsection

Neighbor discovery
\layout Subsubsection

Neighbor discovery solicitation for duplicate address detection
\layout Standard

Following packets are sent by a node with layer 2 MAC address 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

0:12:34:12:34:56
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 during autoconfiguration to check whether a potential address is already
 used by another node on the link sending this to the solicited-node link-local
 multicast address
\layout Itemize

Node wants to configure its link-local address 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

fe80::212:34ff:fe12:3456
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

, checks for duplicate now
\layout Code

15:44:17.712338 :: > ff02::1:ff12:3456: icmp6: neighbor sol: who has
\layout Code

¬ fe80::212:34ff:fe12:3456(src lladdr: 0:12:34:12:34:56) (len 32, hlim 255)
\layout Itemize

Node wants to configure its global address 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

2002:0102:0304:1:212:34ff:fe12:3456
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 (after receiving advertisement shown above), checks for duplicate now
\layout Code

15:44:21.905596 :: > ff02::1:ff12:3456: icmp6: neighbor sol: who has
\layout Code

¬ 2002:0102:0304:1:212:34ff:fe12:3456(src lladdr: 0:12:34:12:34:56) (len
 32,
\layout Code

¬ hlim 255)
\layout Itemize

Node wants to configure its global address 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

3ffe:ffff:0:1:212:34ff:fe12:3456
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 (after receiving advertisement shown above), checks for duplicate now
\layout Code

15:44:22.304028 :: > ff02::1:ff12:3456: icmp6: neighbor sol: who has
\layout Code

¬ 3ffe:ffff:0:1:212:34ff:fe12:3456(src lladdr: 0:12:34:12:34:56) (len 32,
 hlim
\layout Code

¬ 255)
\layout Subsubsection

Neighbor discovery solicitation for looking for host or gateway
\layout Itemize

Note wants to send packages to 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

3ffe:ffff:0:1::10
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 but has no layer 2 MAC address to send packet, so send solicitation now
\layout Code

13:07:47.664538 2002:0102:0304:1:2e0:18ff:fe90:9205 > ff02::1:ff00:10: icmp6:
\layout Code

¬ neighbor sol: who has 3ffe:ffff:0:1::10(src lladdr: 0:e0:18:90:92:5) (len
 32,
\layout Code

¬ hlim 255)
\layout Itemize

Node looks for 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

fe80::10
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 now
\layout Code

13:11:20.870070 fe80::2e0:18ff:fe90:9205 > ff02::1:ff00:10: icmp6: neighbor
\layout Code

¬ sol: who has fe80::10(src lladdr: 0:e0:18:90:92:5) (len 32, hlim 255)
\layout Chapter


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{chapter-support-persistent-configuration}

\end_inset 

Support for persistent IPv6 configuration in Linux distributions
\layout Standard

Some Linux distribution contain already support of a persistent IPv6 configurati
on using existing or new configuration and script files and some hook in
 the IPv4 script files.
\layout Section

Red Hat Linux and 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

clones
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Since starting writing the 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPv6 & Linux - HowTo]{http://www.bieringer.de/linux/IPv6/}

\end_inset 

 it was my intention to enable a persistent IPv6 configuration which catch
 most of the wished cases like host-only, router-only, dual-homed-host,
 router with second stub network, normal tunnels, 6to4 tunnels, and so on.
 Nowadays there exists a set of configuration and script files which do
 the job very well (never heard about real problems, but I don't know how
 many use the set.
 Because this configuration and scrips files are extended from time to time,
 they got their own HOWTO page: 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPv6-HOWTO/scripts/current]{http://www.bieringer.de/linux/IPv6/IPv6-HOWTO/scripts/current/}

\end_inset 

.
 Because I began my IPv6 experience using a Red Hat Linux 5.0 clone, my IPv6
 development systems are mostly Red Hat Linux based now, it's kind a logic
 that the scripts are developed for this kind of distribution (so called
 
\emph on 
historic issue
\emph default 
).
 Also it was very easy to extend some configuration files, create new ones
 and create some simple hook for calling IPv6 setup during IPv4 setup.
\layout Standard

Fortunately, in Red Hat Linux since 7.1 a snapshot of my IPv6 scripts is
 included, this was and is still further on assisted by Pekka Savola.
\layout Standard

Mandrake since version 8.0 also includes an IPv6-enabled initscript package,
 but a minor bug still prevents usage (
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

ifconfig
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 misses 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

inet6
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 before 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

add
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

).
\layout Subsection

Test for IPv6 support of network configuration scripts
\layout Standard

You can test, whether your Linux distribution contain support for persistent
 IPv6 configuration using my set.
 Following script library should exist:
\layout Code

/etc/sysconfig/network-scripts/network-functions-ipv6
\layout Standard

Auto-magically test:
\layout Code

# test -f /etc/sysconfig/network-scripts/network-functions-ipv6 && echo
 "Main
\layout Code

¬ IPv6 script library exists"
\layout Standard

The version of the library is important if you miss some features.
 You can get it executing following (or easier look at the top of the file):
\layout Code

# source /etc/sysconfig/network-scripts/network-functions-ipv6 &&
\layout Code

¬ getversion_ipv6_functions 
\layout Code

20011124
\layout Standard

In shown example, the used version is 
\series bold 
20011124
\series default 
.
 Check this against latest information on 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPv6-HOWTO/scripts/current]{http://www.bieringer.de/linux/IPv6/IPv6-HOWTO/scripts/current/}

\end_inset 

 to see what has been changed.
 There is also a change-log available in the distributed tar-ball.
\layout Subsection

Short hint for enabling IPv6 on current RHL 7.1, 7.2, 7.3, ...
\layout Itemize

Check whether running system has already IPv6 module loaded
\layout Code

# modprobe -c | grep net-pf-10
\layout Code

alias net-pf-10 off
\layout Itemize

If result is 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

off
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

, then enable IPv6 networking by editing /etc/sysconfig/network, add following
 new line
\layout Code

NETWORKING_IPV6=yes
\layout Itemize

Reboot or restart networking using
\layout Code

# service network restart
\layout Itemize

Now IPv6 module should be loaded
\layout Code

# modprobe -c | grep ipv6
\layout Code

alias net-pf-10 ipv6
\layout Standard

If your system is on a link which provides router advertisement, autoconfigurati
on will be done automatically.
 For more information which settings are supported see /usr/share/doc/initscript
s-$version/sysconfig.txt.
\layout Section

SuSE Linux
\layout Standard

In newer 7.x versions there is a really rudimentary support available, see
 /etc/rc.config for details.
\layout Standard

Because of the really different configuration and script file structure
 it is hard (or impossible) to use the set for Red Hat Linux and clones
 with this distribution.
\newline 
In versions 8.x they completly change their configuration setup.
 
\layout Subsection

Further information
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[How to setup 6to4 IPv6 with SuSE 7.3]{http://www.feyrer.de/IPv6/SuSE73-IPv6+6to4-setup.html}

\end_inset 


\layout Section

Debian Linux
\layout Standard

I still don't have any information whether a persistent IPv6 configuration
 can be stored somewhere.
\layout Subsection

Further information
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPv6 on Debian Linux]{http://people.debian.org/~csmall/ipv6/}

\end_inset 


\layout Chapter


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{chapter-autoconfiguration}

\end_inset 

Auto-configuration and mobility
\layout Section

Stateless auto-configuration
\layout Standard

Is supported and seen on the assigned link-local address after an IPv6-enabled
 interface is up.
\layout Section

Stateful auto-configuration using Router Advertisement Daemon (radvd)
\layout Standard

to be filled.
 See 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref[radvd daemon autoconfiguration]{hints-daemons-radvd}

\end_inset 

 below.
\layout Section

Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol v6 (DHCPv6)
\layout Standard

to be filled.
\layout Section

Mobility
\layout Standard

to be filled.
\layout Standard

For the moment, see 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Mobile IPv6 for Linux(MIPL) homepage]{http://www.mipl.mediapoli.com/}

\end_inset 

 for more details
\layout Chapter


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{chapter-firewalling-security}

\end_inset 

Firewalling
\layout Standard

IPv6 firewalling is important, especially if using IPv6 on internal networks
 with global IPv6 addresses.
 Because unlike at IPv4 networks where in common internal hosts are protected
 automatically using private IPv4 addresses like 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[RFC 1918 / Address Allocation for Private Internets]{http://rfc.net/rfc1918.html}

\end_inset 

 or 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[APIPA / Automatic Private IP Addressing]{http://www.glossary-tech.com/apipa.htm}

\end_inset 

, in IPv6 normally global addresses are used and someone with IPv6 connectivity
 can reach all internal IPv6 enabled nodes.
\layout Section


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{firewalling-netfilter6}

\end_inset 

Firewalling using netfilter6 
\layout Standard

Native IPv6 firewalling is only supported in kernel versions 2.4+.
 In older 2.2- you can only filter IPv6-in-IPv4 by protocol 41.
 
\layout Standard

Attention: no warranty that described rules or examples are really protect
 your system! 
\layout Standard

Audit your ruleset after installation, see 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{IPv6-security-auditing}

\end_inset 

 for more.
\layout Subsection

More information
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Netfilter project]{http://www.netfilter.org/}

\end_inset 


\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[maillist archive of netfilter users]{http://lists.samba.org/pipermail/netfilter/}

\end_inset 


\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[maillist archive of netfilter developers]{http://lists.samba.org/pipermail/netfilter-devel/}

\end_inset 


\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Unofficial status informations]{http://www.bieringer.de/linux/IPv6/status/IPv6+Linux-status-kernel.html#netfilter6 }

\end_inset 


\layout Section

Preparation
\layout Subsection

Get sources
\layout Standard

Get the latest kernel source: 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[http://www.kernel.org/]{http://www.kernel.org/}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Get the latest iptables package: 
\layout Itemize

Source tarball (for kernel patches): 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[http://www.netfilter.org/]{http://www.netfilter.org/}

\end_inset 


\layout Itemize

Source RPM for rebuild of binary (for RedHat systems): 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[ftp://ftp.redhat.com/redhat/linux/rawhide/SRPMS/SRPMS/]{ftp://ftp.redhat.com/redhat/linux/rawhide/SRPMS/SRPMS/}

\end_inset 

 or perhaps also at 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[http://www.netcore.fi/pekkas/linux/ipv6/ ]{http://www.netcore.fi/pekkas/linux/ipv6/ }

\end_inset 


\layout Subsection

Extract sources
\layout Standard

Change to source directory: 
\layout Code

# cd /path/to/src 
\layout Standard

Unpack and rename kernel sources 
\layout Code

# tar z|jxf kernel-version.tar.gz|bz2 
\layout Code

# mv linux linux-version-iptables-version+IPv6 
\layout Standard

Unpack iptables sources 
\layout Code

# tar z|jxf iptables-version.tar.gz|bz2 
\layout Subsection

Apply latest iptables/IPv6-related patches to kernel source
\layout Standard

Change to iptables directory 
\layout Code

# cd iptables-version 
\layout Standard

Apply pending patches 
\layout Code

# make pending-patches KERNEL_DIR=/path/to/src/linux-version-iptables-version/
 
\layout Standard

Apply additional IPv6 related patches (still not in the vanilla kernel included)
 
\layout Code

# make patch-o-matic KERNEL_DIR=/path/to/src/linux-version-iptables-version/
 
\layout Standard

Say yes at following options (iptables-1.2.2) 
\layout Itemize

ah-esp.patch 
\layout Itemize

masq-dynaddr.patch (only needed for systems with dynamic IP assigned WAN
 connections like PPP or PPPoE) 
\layout Itemize

ipv6-agr.patch.ipv6 
\layout Itemize

ipv6-ports.patch.ipv6 
\layout Itemize

LOG.patch.ipv6 
\layout Itemize

REJECT.patch.ipv6 
\layout Standard

Check IPv6 extensions 
\layout Code

# make print-extensions 
\layout Code

Extensions found: IPv6:owner IPv6:limit IPv6:mac IPv6:multiport
\layout Subsection

Configure, build and install new kernel
\layout Standard

Change to kernel sources 
\layout Code

# cd /path/to/src/linux-version-iptables-version/ 
\layout Standard

Edit Makefile 
\layout Code

- EXTRAVERSION = 
\layout Code

+ EXTRAVERSION = -iptables-version+IPv6-try 
\layout Standard

Run configure, enable IPv6 related 
\layout Code

            Code maturity level options 
\layout Code

                  Prompt for development and/or incomplete code/drivers
 : yes 
\layout Code

            Networking options 
\layout Code

                  Network packet filtering: yes 
\layout Code

                  The IPv6 protocol: module 
\layout Code

                       IPv6: Netfilter Configuration 
\layout Code

                             IP6 tables support: module 
\layout Code

                             All new options like following: 
\layout Code

                                   limit match support: module 
\layout Code

                                   MAC address match support: module 
\layout Code

                                   Multiple port match support: module 
\layout Code

                                   Owner match support: module 
\layout Code

                                   netfilter MARK match support: module
 
\layout Code

                                   Aggregated address check: module 
\layout Code

                                   Packet filtering: module 
\layout Code

                                        REJECT target support: module 
\layout Code

                                        LOG target support: module 
\layout Code

                                   Packet mangling: module 
\layout Code

                                   MARK target support: module 
\layout Standard

Configure other related to your system, too 
\layout Standard

Compilation and installing: see the kernel section here and other HOWTOs
 
\layout Subsection

Rebuild and install binaries of iptables
\layout Standard

Make sure, that upper kernel source tree is also available at /usr/src/linux/
 
\layout Standard

Rename older directory 
\layout Code

# mv /usr/src/linux /usr/src/linux.old 
\layout Standard

Create a new softlink 
\layout Code

# ln /path/to/src/linux-version-iptables-version /usr/src/linux 
\layout Standard

Rebuild SRPMS 
\layout Code

# rpm --rebuild /path/to/SRPMS/iptables-version-release.src.rpm 
\layout Standard

Install new iptables packages (iptables + iptables-ipv6) 
\layout Itemize

On RH 7.1 systems, normally, already an older version is installed, therefore
 use "freshen" 
\layout Code

# rpm -Fhv /path/to/RPMS/cpu/iptables*-version-release.cpu.rpm 
\layout Itemize

If not already installed, use "install" 
\layout Code

# rpm -ihv /path/to/RPMS/cpu/iptables*-version-release.cpu.rpm 
\layout Itemize

On RH 6.2 systems, normally, no kernel 2.4.x is installed, therefore the requiremen
ts don't fit.
 Use "--nodeps" to install it 
\layout Code

# rpm -ihv --nodep /path/to/RPMS/cpu/iptables*-version-release.cpu.rpm 
\layout Standard

Perhaps it's necessary to create a softlink for iptables libraries where
 iptables looks for them 
\layout Code

# ln -s /lib/iptables/ /usr/lib/iptables 
\layout Section

Usage
\layout Subsection

Check for support
\layout Standard

Load module, if so compiled 
\layout Code

# modprobe ip6_tables 
\layout Standard

Check for capability 
\layout Code

# [ ! -f /proc/net/ip6_tables_names ] && echo "Current kernel doesn't support
\layout Code

¬ 'ip6tables' firewalling (IPv6)!" 
\layout Subsection

Learn how to use ip6tables
\layout Subsubsection

List all IPv6 netfilter entries 
\layout Itemize

Short 
\layout Code

# ip6tables -L 
\layout Itemize

Extended 
\layout Code

# ip6tables -n -v --line-numbers -L 
\layout Subsubsection

List specified filter 
\layout Code

# ip6tables -n -v --line-numbers -L INPUT 
\layout Subsubsection

Insert a log rule at the input filter with options 
\layout Code

# ip6tables --table filter --append INPUT  -j LOG --log-prefix "INPUT:"
\layout Code

¬ --log-level 7 
\layout Subsubsection

Insert a drop rule at the input filter 
\layout Code

# ip6tables --table filter --append INPUT  -j DROP 
\layout Subsubsection

Delete a rule by number 
\layout Code

# ip6tables --table filter --delete INPUT 1 
\layout Subsubsection

Allow ICMPv6
\layout Standard

Using older kernels (unpatched kernel 2.4.5 and iptables-1.2.2) no type can
 be specified
\layout Itemize

Accept incoming ICMPv6 through tunnels 
\layout Code

# ip6tables -A INPUT -i sit+ -p icmpv6 -j ACCEPT 
\layout Itemize

Allow outgoing ICMPv6 through tunnels 
\layout Code

# ip6tables -A OUTPUT -o sit+ -p icmpv6 -j ACCEPT 
\layout Standard

Newer kernels allow specifying of ICMPv6 types:
\layout Code

# ip6tables -A INPUT -p icmpv6 --icmpv6-type echo-request -j ACCEPT
\layout Subsubsection

Rate-limiting
\layout Standard

Because it can happen (author already saw it to times) that an ICMPv6 storm
 will raise up, you should use available rate limiting for at least ICMPv6
 ruleset.
 In addition logging rules should also get rate limiting to prevent DoS
 attacks against syslog and storage of log file partition.
 An example for a rate limited ICMPv6 looks like:
\layout Code

# ip6tables -A INPUT --protocol icmpv6 --icmpv6-type echo-request -j ACCEPT
 --match limit --limit 30/minute
\layout Subsubsection

Allow incoming SSH
\layout Standard

Here an example is shown for a ruleset which allows incoming SSH connection
 from a specified IPv6 address 
\layout Itemize

Allow incoming SSH from 3ffe:ffff:100::1/128 
\layout Code

# ip6tables -A INPUT -i sit+ -p tcp -s 3ffe:ffff:100::1/128 --sport 512:65535
\layout Code

¬ --dport 22 -j ACCEPT 
\layout Itemize

Allow response packets (at the moment IPv6 connection tracking isn't in
 mainstream netfilter6 implemented) 
\layout Code

# ip6tables -A OUTPUT -o sit+ -p tcp -d 3ffe:ffff:100::1/128 --dport 512:65535
\layout Code

¬ --sport 22 ! --syn j ACCEPT 
\layout Subsubsection

Enable tunneled IPv6-in-IPv4
\layout Standard

Tto accept tunneled IPv6-in-IPv4 packets, you have to insert rules in your
 
\series bold 
IPv4 firewall setup
\series default 
 relating to such packets, for example 
\layout Itemize

Accept incoming IPv6-in-IPv4 on interface ppp0 
\layout Code

# iptables -A INPUT -i ppp0 -p ipv6 -j ACCEPT 
\layout Itemize

Allow outgoing IPv6-in-IPv4 to interface ppp0 
\layout Code

# iptables -A OUTPUT -o ppp0 -p ipv6 -j ACCEPT 
\layout Standard

If you have only a static tunnel, you can specify the IPv4 addresses, too,
 like 
\layout Itemize

Accept incoming IPv6-in-IPv4 on interface ppp0 from tunnel endpoint 1.2.3.4
 
\layout Code

# iptables -A INPUT -i ppp0 -p ipv6 -s 1.2.3.4 -j ACCEPT 
\layout Itemize

Allow outgoing IPv6-in-IPv4 to interface ppp0 to tunnel endpoint 1.2.3.4 
\layout Code

# iptables -A OUTPUT -o ppp0 -p ipv6 -d 1.2.3.4 -j ACCEPT 
\layout Subsubsection

Protection against incoming TCP connection requests
\layout Standard


\series bold 
VERY RECOMMENDED!
\series default 
 For security issues you should really insert a rule which blocks incoming
 TCP connection requests.
 Adapt "-i" option, if other interface names are in use! 
\layout Itemize

Block incoming TCP connection requests to this host 
\layout Code

# ip6tables -I INPUT -i sit+ -p tcp --syn -j DROP 
\layout Itemize

Block incoming TCP connection requests to hosts behind this router 
\layout Code

# ip6tables -I FORWARD -i sit+ -p tcp --syn -j DROP 
\layout Standard

Perhaps the rules have to be placed below others, but that is work you have
 to think about it.
 Best way is to create a script and execute rules in a specified way.
 
\layout Subsubsection

Protection against incoming UDP connection requests
\layout Standard


\series bold 
ALSO RECOMMENDED!
\series default 
 Like mentioned on my firewall information it's possible to control the
 ports on outgoing UDP/TCP sessions.
 So if all of your local IPv6 systems are use local ports e.g.
 from 32768 to 60999 you are able to filter UDP connections also (until
 connection tracking works) like: 
\layout Itemize

Block incoming UDP packets which cannot be responses of outgoing requests
 of this host 
\layout Code

# ip6tables -I INPUT -i sit+ -p udp ! --dport 32768:60999 -j DROP 
\layout Itemize

Block incoming UDP packets which cannot be responses of forwarded requests
 of hosts behind this router 
\layout Code

ip6tables -I FORWARD -i sit+ -p udp ! --dport 32768:60999 -j DROP 
\layout Subsection

Demonstration example
\layout Standard

Following lines show a more sophisticated setup as an example.
 Happy netfilter6 ruleset creation....
 
\layout Code

# ip6tables -n -v -L 
\layout Code

Chain INPUT (policy DROP 0 packets, 0 bytes) 
\layout Code

 pkts bytes target     prot opt in     out     source               destination
\layout Code

    0     0 extIN      all      sit+   *       ::/0                 ::/0
 
\layout Code

    4   384 intIN      all      eth0   *       ::/0                 ::/0
 
\layout Code

    0     0 ACCEPT     all      *      *       ::1/128              ::1/128
 
\layout Code

    0     0 ACCEPT     all      lo     *       ::/0                 ::/0
 
\layout Code

    0     0 LOG        all      *      *       ::/0                 ::/0
       
\layout Code

¬        LOG flags 0 level 7 prefix `INPUT-default:' 
\layout Code

    0     0 DROP       all      *      *       ::/0                 ::/0
 
\layout Code

 
\layout Code

Chain FORWARD (policy DROP 0 packets, 0 bytes) 
\layout Code

 pkts bytes target     prot opt in     out     source               destination
\layout Code

¬ 
\layout Code

    0     0 int2ext    all      eth0   sit+    ::/0                 ::/0
 
\layout Code

    0     0 ext2int    all      sit+   eth0    ::/0                 ::/0
 
\layout Code

    0     0 LOG        all      *      *       ::/0                 ::/0
       
\layout Code

¬        LOG flags 0 level 7 prefix `FORWARD-default:' 
\layout Code

    0     0 DROP       all      *      *       ::/0                 ::/0
 
\layout Code

 
\layout Code

Chain OUTPUT (policy DROP 0 packets, 0 bytes) 
\layout Code

 pkts bytes target     prot opt in     out     source               destination
\layout Code

¬ 
\layout Code

    0     0 extOUT     all      *      sit+    ::/0                 ::/0
 
\layout Code

    4   384 intOUT     all      *      eth0    ::/0                 ::/0
 
\layout Code

    0     0 ACCEPT     all      *      *       ::1/128              ::1/128
 
\layout Code

    0     0 ACCEPT     all      *      lo      ::/0                 ::/0
 
\layout Code

    0     0 LOG        all      *      *       ::/0                 ::/0
       
\layout Code

¬        LOG flags 0 level 7 prefix `OUTPUT-default:' 
\layout Code

    0     0 DROP       all      *      *       ::/0                 ::/0
 
\layout Code

 
\layout Code

Chain ext2int (1 references) 
\layout Code

 pkts bytes target     prot opt in     out     source               destination
\layout Code

¬ 
\layout Code

    0     0 ACCEPT     icmpv6    *      *       ::/0                 ::/0
 
\layout Code

    0     0 ACCEPT     tcp      *      *       ::/0                 ::/0
       
\layout Code

¬        tcp spts:1:65535 dpts:1024:65535 flags:!0x16/0x02 
\layout Code

    0     0 LOG        all      *      *       ::/0                 ::/0
       
\layout Code

¬        LOG flags 0 level 7 prefix `ext2int-default:' 
\layout Code

    0     0 DROP       tcp      *      *       ::/0                 ::/0
 
\layout Code

    0     0 DROP       udp      *      *       ::/0                 ::/0
 
\layout Code

    0     0 DROP       all      *      *       ::/0                 ::/0
 
\layout Code

 
\layout Code

Chain extIN (1 references) 
\layout Code

 pkts bytes target     prot opt in     out     source               destination
\layout Code

¬ 
\layout Code

    0     0 ACCEPT     tcp      *      *       3ffe:400:100::1/128  ::/0
       
\layout Code

¬        tcp spts:512:65535 dpt:22 
\layout Code

    0     0 ACCEPT     tcp      *      *       3ffe:400:100::2/128  ::/0
       
\layout Code

¬        tcp spts:512:65535 dpt:22 
\layout Code

    0     0 ACCEPT     icmpv6    *      *       ::/0                 ::/0
 
\layout Code

    0     0 ACCEPT     tcp      *      *       ::/0                 ::/0
       
\layout Code

¬        tcp spts:1:65535 dpts:1024:65535 flags:!0x16/0x02 
\layout Code

    0     0 ACCEPT     udp      *      *       ::/0                 ::/0
       
\layout Code

¬        udp spts:1:65535 dpts:1024:65535 
\layout Code

    0     0 LOG        all      *      *       ::/0                 ::/0
       
\layout Code

¬        limit: avg 5/min burst 5 LOG flags 0 level 7 prefix `extIN-default:'
 
\layout Code

    0     0 DROP       all      *      *       ::/0                 ::/0
 
\layout Code

 
\layout Code

Chain extOUT (1 references) 
\layout Code

 pkts bytes target     prot opt in     out     source               destination
\layout Code

¬ 
\layout Code

    0     0 ACCEPT     tcp      *      *       ::/0                
\layout Code

¬ 3ffe:ffff:100::1/128tcp spt:22 dpts:512:65535 flags:!0x16/0x02 
\layout Code

    0     0 ACCEPT     tcp      *      *       ::/0                
\layout Code

¬ 3ffe:ffff:100::2/128tcp spt:22 dpts:512:65535 flags:!0x16/0x02 
\layout Code

    0     0 ACCEPT     icmpv6    *      *       ::/0                 ::/0
 
\layout Code

    0     0 ACCEPT     tcp      *      *       ::/0                 ::/0
       
\layout Code

¬        tcp spts:1024:65535 dpts:1:65535 
\layout Code

    0     0 ACCEPT     udp      *      *       ::/0                 ::/0
       
\layout Code

¬        udp spts:1024:65535 dpts:1:65535 
\layout Code

    0     0 LOG        all      *      *       ::/0                 ::/0
       
\layout Code

¬        LOG flags 0 level 7 prefix `extOUT-default:' 
\layout Code

    0     0 DROP       all      *      *       ::/0                 ::/0
 
\layout Code

 
\layout Code

Chain int2ext (1 references) 
\layout Code

 pkts bytes target     prot opt in     out     source               destination
\layout Code

¬ 
\layout Code

    0     0 ACCEPT     icmpv6    *      *       ::/0                 ::/0
 
\layout Code

    0     0 ACCEPT     tcp      *      *       ::/0                 ::/0
       
\layout Code

¬        tcp spts:1024:65535 dpts:1:65535 
\layout Code

    0     0 LOG        all      *      *       ::/0                 ::/0
       
\layout Code

¬        LOG flags 0 level 7 prefix `int2ext:' 
\layout Code

    0     0 DROP       all      *      *       ::/0                 ::/0
 
\layout Code

    0     0 LOG        all      *      *       ::/0                 ::/0
       
\layout Code

¬        LOG flags 0 level 7 prefix `int2ext-default:' 
\layout Code

    0     0 DROP       tcp      *      *       ::/0                 ::/0
 
\layout Code

    0     0 DROP       udp      *      *       ::/0                 ::/0
 
\layout Code

    0     0 DROP       all      *      *       ::/0                 ::/0
 
\layout Code

 
\layout Code

Chain intIN (1 references) 
\layout Code

 pkts bytes target     prot opt in     out     source               destination
\layout Code

¬ 
\layout Code

    0     0 ACCEPT     all      *      *       ::/0                
\layout Code

¬ fe80::/ffc0:: 
\layout Code

    4   384 ACCEPT     all      *      *       ::/0                 ff02::/16
 
\layout Code

 
\layout Code

Chain intOUT (1 references) 
\layout Code

 pkts bytes target     prot opt in     out     source               destination
\layout Code

¬ 
\layout Code

    0     0 ACCEPT     all      *      *       ::/0                
\layout Code

¬ fe80::/ffc0:: 
\layout Code

    4   384 ACCEPT     all      *      *       ::/0                 ff02::/16
 
\layout Code

    0     0 LOG        all      *      *       ::/0                 ::/0
       
\layout Code

¬        LOG flags 0 level 7 prefix `intOUT-default:' 
\layout Code

    0     0 DROP       all      *      *       ::/0                 ::/0
 
\layout Chapter


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{chapter-security}

\end_inset 

Security
\layout Section

Node security
\layout Standard

It's very recommend to apply all available patches and disable all not necessary
 services.
 Also bind services to the needed IPv4/IPv6 addresses only and install local
 firewalling.
\layout Standard

More to be filled...
\layout Section

Access limitations
\layout Standard

Many services uses the tcp_wrapper library for access control.
 Below is described the 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref[use of tcp_wrapper]{hints-daemons-tcpwrapper}

\end_inset 

.
\layout Standard

More to be filled...
\layout Section


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{IPv6-security-auditing}

\end_inset 

IPv6 security auditing
\layout Standard

Currently there are no comfortable tools out which are able to check a system
 over network for IPv6 security issues.
 Neither 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Nessus]{http://www.nessus.org/}

\end_inset 

 nor any commercial security scanner is as far as I know able to scan IPv6
 addresses.
\layout Subsection

Legal issues
\layout Standard

ATTENTION: always take care that you only scan your own systems or after
 receiving a written order, otherwise legal issues are able to come up to
 you.
\newline 
CHECK destination IPv6 addresses TWICE before starting a scan.
\layout Subsection

Security auditing using IPv6-enabled netcat
\layout Standard

With the IPv6-enabled netcat (see 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPv6+Linux-status-apps/security-auditing]{http://www.bieringer.de/linux/IPv6/status/IPv6+Linux-status-apps.html#security-auditing}

\end_inset 

 for more) you can run a portscan by wrapping a script around which run
 through a port range, grab banners and so on.
 Usage example:
\layout Code

# nc6 ::1 daytime
\layout Code

13 JUL 2002 11:22:22 CEST
\layout Subsection

Security auditing using IPv6-enabled nmap
\layout Standard


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[NMap]{http://www.insecure.org/nmap/}

\end_inset 

, one of the best portscaner around the world, supports IPv6 since version
 3.10ALPHA1.
 Usage example:
\layout Code

# nmap -6 -sT ::1
\layout Code

Starting nmap V.
 3.10ALPHA3 ( www.insecure.org/nmap/ ) 
\layout Code

Interesting ports on localhost6 (::1): 
\layout Code

(The 1600 ports scanned but not shown below are in state: closed) 
\layout Code

Port       State       Service 
\layout Code

22/tcp     open        ssh 
\layout Code

53/tcp     open        domain 
\layout Code

515/tcp    open        printer 
\layout Code

2401/tcp   open        cvspserver
\layout Code

Nmap run completed -- 1 IP address (1 host up) scanned in 0.525 seconds
\layout Subsection

Security auditing using IPv6-enabled strobe
\layout Standard

Strobe is a (compared to NMap) more a low budget portscanner, but there
 is an IPv6-enabling patch available (see 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPv6+Linux-status-apps/security-auditing]{http://www.bieringer.de/linux/IPv6/status/IPv6+Linux-status-apps.html#security-auditing}

\end_inset 

 for more).
 Usage example:
\layout Code

# ./strobe ::1 strobe 1.05 (c) 1995-1999 Julian Assange <proff@iq.org>.
\layout Code

::1 2401 unassigned unknown
\layout Code

::1 22 ssh Secure Shell - RSA encrypted rsh 
\layout Code

::1 515 printer spooler (lpd)
\layout Code

::1 6010 unassigned unknown 
\layout Code

::1 53 domain Domain Name Server
\layout Standard

Note: strobe isn't really developed further on, the shown version number
 isn't the right one.
\layout Subsection

Audit results
\layout Standard

If the result of an audit mismatch your IPv6 security policy, use IPv6 firewalli
ng to close the holes, e.g.
 using netfilter6 (see 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref[Firewalling/Netfilter6]{firewalling-netfilter6}

\end_inset 

 for more).
\layout Chapter


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{chapter-encryption-authentication}

\end_inset 

Encryption and Authentication
\layout Standard

Unlike in IPv4 encryption and authentication is a mandatory feature of IPv6.
 This features are normally implemented using IPsec (which can be also used
 by IPv4).
\layout Standard

But because of the independence of encryption and authentication from the
 key exchange protocol there exists currently some interoperability problems
 regarding this issue.
\layout Section

Support in kernel
\layout Subsection

Support in vanilla Linux kernel
\layout Standard

Currently missing in 2.4, perhaps in 2.5 (see below).
 There is an issue about keeping the Linux kernel source free of export/import-c
ontrol-laws regarding encryption code.
 This is also one case why 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[FreeS/WAN project]{http://www.freeswan.org/}

\end_inset 

 (IPv4 only IPsec) isn't still contained in vanilla source.
\layout Subsection

Support in USAGI kernel
\layout Standard

The USAGI project has taken over in July 2001 the IPv6 enabled FreeS/WAN
 code from the 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IABG / IPv6 Project]{http://www.ipv6.iabg.de/downloadframe/}

\end_inset 

 and included in their kernel extensions, but still work in progress, means
 that not all IABG features are already working in USAGI extension.
\layout Section

Usage
\layout Standard

to be filled, mostly like FreeS/WAN for IPv4.
 For the meantime look for documentation at 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[FreeS/WAN / Online documentation]{http://www.freeswan.org/doc.html}

\end_inset 

.
\layout Chapter


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{chapter-qos}

\end_inset 

Quality of Service (QoS)
\layout Standard

IPv6 supports QoS with use of Flow Labels and Traffic Classes.
 This can be controlled using 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

tc
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 (contained in package 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

iproute
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

).
\layout Standard

more to be filled...
\layout Chapter


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{chapter-hints-daemons}

\end_inset 

Hints for IPv6-enabled daemons
\layout Standard

Here some hints are shown for IPv6-enabled daemons.
\layout Section


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{hints-daemons-bind}

\end_inset 

Berkeley Internet Name Daemon BIND (named)
\layout Standard

IPv6 is supported since version 9.
 Always use newest available version.
 At least version 9.1.3 must be used, older versions can contain remote exploitabl
e security holes.
\layout Subsection

Listening on IPv6 addresses
\layout Standard

Note: unlike in IPv4 current versions doesn't allow to bind a server socket
 to dedicated IPv6 addresses, so only 
\emph on 
any
\emph default 
 or 
\emph on 
none
\emph default 
 are valid.
 Because this can be a security issue, check the Access Control List (ACL)
 section below, too!
\layout Subsubsection

Enable BIND named for listening on IPv6 address
\layout Standard

To enable IPv6 for listening, following options are requested to change
\layout Code

options {
\layout Code

        # sure other options here, too
\layout Code

        listen-on-v6 { any; };
\layout Code

};
\layout Standard

This should result after restart in e.g.
\layout Code

# netstat -lnptu |grep "named
\backslash 
W*$" 
\layout Code

tcp 0 0 :::53         :::*      LISTEN 1234/named # incoming TCP requests
\layout Code

udp 0 0 1.2.3.4:53    0.0.0.0:*        1234/named # incoming UDP requests to IPv4
 1.2.3.4
\layout Code

udp 0 0 127.0.0.1:53  0.0.0.0:*        1234/named # incoming UDP requests to IPv4
 localhost
\layout Code

udp 0 0 0.0.0.0:32868 0.0.0.0:*        1234/named # dynamic chosen port for outgoing
 queries
\layout Code

udp 0 0 :::53         :::*             1234/named # incoming UDP request
 to any IPv6
\layout Standard

And a simple test looks like
\layout Code

# dig localhost @::1
\layout Standard

and should show you a result.
\layout Subsubsection

Disable BIND named for listening on IPv6 address
\layout Standard

To disable IPv6 for listening, following options are requested to change
\layout Code

options {
\layout Code

        # sure other options here, too
\layout Code

        listen-on-v6 { none; };
\layout Code

};
\layout Subsection

IPv6 enabled Access Control Lists (ACL)
\layout Standard

IPv6 enabled ACLs are possible and should be used whenever it's possible.
 An example looks like following:
\layout Code

acl internal-net { 
\layout Code

        127.0.0.1; 
\layout Code

        1.2.3.0/24;  
\layout Code

        3ffe:ffff:100::/56; 
\layout Code

        ::1/128; 
\layout Code

        ::ffff:1.2.3.4/128; 
\layout Code

};
\layout Code

acl ns-internal-net { 
\layout Code

        1.2.3.4;  
\layout Code

        1.2.3.5;  
\layout Code

        3ffe:ffff:100::4/128; 
\layout Code

        3ffe:ffff:100::5/128; 
\layout Code

};
\layout Standard

This ACLs can be used e.g.
 for queries of clients and transfer zones to secondary name-servers.
 This prevents also your caching name-server to be used from outside using
 IPv6.
\layout Code

options {
\layout Code

        # sure other options here, too
\layout Code

        listen-on-v6 { none; };
\layout Code

        allow-query { internal-net; }; 
\layout Code

        allow-transfer { ns-internal-net; }; 
\layout Code

};
\layout Standard

It's also possible to set the 
\emph on 
allow-query 
\emph default 
and 
\emph on 
allow-transfer
\emph default 
 option for most of single zone definitions, too.
\layout Subsection

Sending queries with dedicated IPv6 address
\layout Standard

This option is not required, but perhaps needed:
\layout Code

query-source-v6 address <ipv6address|*> port <port|*>;
\layout Subsection

Per zone defined dedicated IPv6 addresses
\layout Standard

It's also possible to define per zone some IPv6 addresses.
\layout Subsubsection

Transfer source address 
\layout Standard

Transfer source address is used for outgoing zone transfers:
\layout Code

transfer-source-v6 <ipv6addr|*> [port port];
\layout Subsubsection

Notify source address 
\layout Standard

Notify source address is used for outgoing notify messages:
\layout Code

notify-source-v6 <ipv6addr|*> [port port];
\layout Subsection

Serving IPv6 related DNS data
\layout Standard

For IPv6 new types and root zones for reverse lookups are defined:
\layout Itemize

AAAA and reverse IP6.INT: specified in 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[RFC 1886 / DNS Extensions to support IP version 6]{http://rfc.net/rfc1886.html}

\end_inset 

, usable since BIND version 4.9.6
\layout Itemize

A6, DNAME (DEPRICATED NOW!) and reverse IP6.ARPA: specified in 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[RFC 2874 / DNS Extensions to Support IPv6 Address Aggregation and Renumbering]{http://rfc.net/rfc2874.html}

\end_inset 

, usable since BIND 9, but see also an information about the current state
 at 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[draft-ietf-dnsext-ipv6-addresses-00.txt]{http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Perhaps filled later more content, for the meantime take a look at given
 RFCs and
\layout Itemize

AAAA and reverse IP6.INT: 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPv6 DNS Setup Information]{http://www.isi.edu/~bmanning/v6DNS.html}

\end_inset 


\layout Itemize

A6, DNAME (DEPRICATED NOW!) and reverse IP6.ARPA: take a look into chapter
 4 and 6 of the BIND 9 Administrator Reference Manual (ARM) distributed
 which the bind-package or get this here: 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[BIND version 9 ARM (PDF)]{http://www.nominum.com/resources/documentation/Bv9ARM.pdf}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Because IP6.INT is deprecated (but still in use), a DNS server which will
 support IPv6 information has to serve both reverse zones.
\layout Subsubsection

Current best practice
\layout Standard

Because there are some troubles around using the new formats, current best
 practice is:
\layout Standard

Forward lookup support:
\layout Itemize

AAAA
\layout Standard

Reverse lookup support:
\layout Itemize

Reverse nibble format for zone ip6.int (FOR BACKWARD COMPATIBILITY)
\layout Itemize

Reverse nibble format for zone ip6.arpa (RECOMMENDED)
\layout Subsection

Checking IPv6-enabled connect
\layout Standard

To check, whether BIND is listening on an IPv6 socket and serving data see
 following examples.
\layout Subsubsection

IPv6 connect, but denied by ACL
\layout Standard

Specifying a dedicated server for the query, an IPv6 connect can be forced:
\layout Code

$ host -t aaaa www.6bone.net 3ffe:ffff:200:f101::1 
\layout Code

Using domain server: 
\layout Code

Name: 3ffe:ffff:200:f101::1 
\layout Code

Address: 3ffe:ffff:200:f101::1#53 
\layout Code

Aliases:
\layout Code

\layout Code

Host www.6bone.net.
 not found: 5(REFUSED)
\layout Standard

Related log entry looks like following:
\layout Code

Jan 3 12:43:32 gate named[12347]: client
\layout Code

¬ 3ffe:ffff:200:f101:212:34ff:fe12:3456#32770: 
\layout Code

 query denied
\layout Standard

If you see such entries in the log, check whether requests from this client
 should be allowed and perhaps review your ACL configuration.
\layout Subsubsection

Successful IPv6 connect
\layout Standard

A successful IPv6 connect looks like following:
\layout Code

$ host -t aaaa www.6bone.net 3ffe:ffff:200:f101::1 
\layout Code

Using domain server: 
\layout Code

Name: 3ffe:ffff:200:f101::1 
\layout Code

Address: 3ffe:ffff:200:f101::1#53 
\layout Code

Aliases:
\layout Code

\layout Code

www.6bone.net.
 is an alias for 6bone.net.
 
\layout Code

6bone.net.
 has AAAA address 3ffe:b00:c18:1::10
\layout Section


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{hints-daemons-xinetd}

\end_inset 

Internet super daemon (xinetd)
\layout Standard

IPv6 is supported since version around 1.8.9.
 Always use newest available version.
 At least version 2.3.3 must be used, older versions can contain remote exploitabl
e security holes.
\layout Standard

Some Linux distribution contain an extra package for the IPv6 enabled xinetd,
 some others start the IPv6-enabled xinetd if following variable is set:
 NETWORKING_IPV6="yes", mostly done by /etc/sysconfig/network (only valid
 for Red Hat like distributions).
\layout Standard

If you enable a built-in service like e.g.
 daytime by modifying the configuration file in /etc/xinetd.d/daytime like
\layout Code

# diff -u /etc/xinetd.d/daytime.orig /etc/xinetd.d/daytime 
\layout Code

--- /etc/xinetd.d/daytime.orig Sun Dec 16 19:00:14 2001 
\layout Code

+++ /etc/xinetd.d/daytime Sun Dec 16 19:00:22 2001 
\layout Code

@@ -10,5 +10,5 @@ 
\layout Code

        protocol = tcp 
\layout Code

        user = root 
\layout Code

        wait = no 
\layout Code

-       disable = yes 
\layout Code

+       disable = no 
\layout Code

 }
\layout Standard

After restarting the xinetd you should get a positive result like:
\layout Code

# netstat -lnptu -A inet6 |grep "xinetd*" 
\layout Code

tcp 0 0 ::ffff:192.168.1.1:993  :::*  LISTEN  12345/xinetd-ipv6 
\layout Code

tcp 0 0 :::13                   :::*  LISTEN  12345/xinetd-ipv6 <- service
\layout Code

¬ daytime/tcp
\layout Code

tcp 0 0 ::ffff:192.168.1.1:143  :::*  LISTEN  12345/xinetd-ipv6
\layout Standard

Shown example also displays an IMAP and IMAP-SSL IPv4-only listening xinetd.
\layout Standard

Note: An IPv4-only xinetd won't start on an IPv6-enabled node and also the
 IPv6-enabled won't start on an IPv4-only node (will be hopefully fixed
 in the future).
\layout Section


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{hints-daemons-apache2}

\end_inset 

Webserver Apache2 (httpd2)
\layout Standard

Apache web server supports IPv6 native by maintainers since 2.0.14.
 Available patches for the older 1.3.x series are not current and shouldn't
 be used in public environment, but available at 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[KAME / Misc]{ftp://ftp.kame.net/pub/kame/misc/}

\end_inset 

.
\layout Subsection

Listening on IPv6 addresses
\layout Standard

Note: virtual hosts on IPv6 addresses are broken in versions until 2.0.28
 (a patch is available for 2.0.28).
 But always try latest available version first because earlier versions
 had some security issues.
\layout Subsubsection

Virtual host listen on an IPv6 address only
\layout Code

Listen [3ffe:ffff:100::1]:80
\layout Code

<VirtualHost [3ffe:ffff:100::1]:80>
\layout Code

        ServerName ipv6only.yourdomain.yourtopleveldomain
\layout Code

        # ...sure more config lines
\layout Code

</VirtualHost>
\layout Subsubsection

Virtual host listen on an IPv6 and on an IPv4 address
\layout Code

Listen [3ffe:ffff:100::2]:80 
\layout Code

Listen 1.2.3.4:80
\layout Code

<VirtualHost [3ffe:ffff:100::2]:80 1.2.3.4:80>
\layout Code

        ServerName ipv6andipv4.yourdomain.yourtopleveldomain
\layout Code

        # ...sure more config lines
\layout Code

</VirtualHost>
\layout Standard

This should result after restart in e.g.
\layout Code

# netstat -lnptu |grep "httpd2
\backslash 
W*$" 
\layout Code

tcp 0 0 1.2.3.4:80          0.0.0.0:* LISTEN 12345/httpd2 
\layout Code

tcp 0 0 3ffe:ffff:100::1:80 :::*      LISTEN 12345/httpd2 
\layout Code

tcp 0 0 3ffe:ffff:100::2:80 :::*      LISTEN 12345/httpd2
\layout Standard

For simple tests use the telnet example already shown.
\layout Section


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{hints-daemons-radvd}

\end_inset 

Router Advertisement Daemon (radvd)
\layout Standard

The router advertisement daemon is very useful on a LAN, if clients should
 be auto-configured.
 The daemon itself should run a Linux router (not necessary the default
 IPv4 gateway).
 
\layout Standard

You can specify some information and flags which should be contained in
 the advertisement.
 Common used are
\layout Itemize

Prefix (needed)
\layout Itemize

Lifetime of the prefix
\layout Itemize

Frequency of sending advertisements (optional)
\layout Standard

After a proper configuration, the daemon sends advertisements through specified
 interfaces and clients are hopefully receive them and auto-magically configure
 addresses with received prefix and the default route.
\layout Subsection

Configuring radvd
\layout Subsubsection

Simple configuration
\layout Standard

Radvd's config file is normally /etc/radvd.conf.
 An simple example looks like following:
\layout Code

interface eth0 { 
\layout Code

        AdvSendAdvert on;
\layout Code

        MinRtrAdvInterval 3; 
\layout Code

        MaxRtrAdvInterval 10;
\layout Code

        prefix 3ffe:ffff:0100:f101::/64 { 
\layout Code

                AdvOnLink on; 
\layout Code

                AdvAutonomous on; 
\layout Code

                AdvRouterAddr on; 
\layout Code

        };
\layout Code

};
\layout Standard

This results on client side in
\layout Code

# ip -6 addr show eth0 
\layout Code

3: eth0: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP> mtu 1500 qdisc pfifo_fast qlen 100 
\layout Code

    inet6 3ffe:ffff:100:f101:2e0:12ff:fe34:1234/64 scope global dynamic
 
\layout Code

       valid_lft 2591992sec preferred_lft 604792sec 
\layout Code

    inet6 fe80::2e0:12ff:fe34:1234/10 scope link
\layout Standard

Because no lifetime was defined, a very high value was used.
\layout Subsubsection

Special 6to4 configuration
\layout Standard

Version since 0.6.2pl3 support the automatic (re)-generation of the prefix
 depending on an IPv4 address of a specified interface.
 This can be used to distribute advertisements in a LAN after the 6to4 tunneling
 has changed.
 Mostly used behind a dynamic dial-on-demand Linux router.
 Because of the sure shorter lifetime of such prefix (after each dial-up,
 another prefix is valid), the lifetime configured to minimal values:
\layout Code

interface eth0 { 
\layout Code

        AdvSendAdvert on;
\layout Code

        MinRtrAdvInterval 3; 
\layout Code

        MaxRtrAdvInterval 10;
\layout Code

        prefix 0:0:0:f101::/64 { 
\layout Code

                AdvOnLink off; 
\layout Code

                AdvAutonomous on; 
\layout Code

                AdvRouterAddr on; 
\layout Code

                Base6to4Interface ppp0;
\layout Code

                AdvPreferredLifetime 20; 
\layout Code

                AdvValidLifetime 30;
\layout Code

        };
\layout Code

};
\layout Standard

This results on client side in (assuming, ppp0 has currently 1.2.3.4 as local
 IPv4 address):
\layout Code

# ip -6 addr show eth0 
\layout Code

3: eth0: <BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP> mtu 1500 qdisc pfifo_fast qlen 100 
\layout Code

   inet6 2002:0102:0304
\series bold 
:
\series default 
f101:2e0:12ff:fe34:1234/64 scope global dynamic 
\layout Code

      valid_lft 22sec preferred_lft 12sec
\layout Code

   inet6 fe80::2e0:12ff:fe34:1234/10 scope link
\layout Standard

Because a small lifetime was defined, such prefix will be thrown away quickly,
 if no related advertisement was received.
\layout Subsection

Debugging
\layout Standard

A program called 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

radvdump
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 can help you looking into sent or received advertisements.
 Simple to use:
\layout Code

# radvdump 
\layout Code

Router advertisement from fe80::280:c8ff:feb9:cef9 (hoplimit 255) 
\layout Code

        AdvCurHopLimit: 64 
\layout Code

        AdvManagedFlag: off 
\layout Code

        AdvOtherConfigFlag: off 
\layout Code

        AdvHomeAgentFlag: off 
\layout Code

        AdvReachableTime: 0 
\layout Code

        AdvRetransTimer: 0 
\layout Code

        Prefix 2002:0102:0304:f101::/64 
\layout Code

                AdvValidLifetime: 30 
\layout Code

                AdvPreferredLifetime: 20 
\layout Code

                AdvOnLink: off 
\layout Code

                AdvAutonomous: on 
\layout Code

                AdvRouterAddr: on 
\layout Code

        Prefix 3ffe:ffff:100:f101::/64 
\layout Code

                AdvValidLifetime: 2592000 
\layout Code

                AdvPreferredLifetime: 604800 
\layout Code

                AdvOnLink: on 
\layout Code

                AdvAutonomous: on 
\layout Code

                AdvRouterAddr: on 
\layout Code

        AdvSourceLLAddress: 00 80 12 34 56 78
\layout Standard

Output shows you each advertisement package in readable format.
 You should see your configured values here again, if not, perhaps it's
 not your radvd which sends the advertisement...look for another router on
 the link (and take the LLAddress, which is the MAC address for tracing).
\layout Section


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{hints-daemons-tcpwrapper}

\end_inset 

tcp_wrapper
\layout Standard

tcp_wrapper is a library which can help you to protect service against misuse.
\layout Subsection

Filtering capabilities
\layout Standard

You can use tcp_wrapper for
\layout Itemize

Filtering against source addresses (IPv4 or IPv6)
\layout Itemize

Filtering against users (requires a running ident daemon on the client)
\layout Subsection

Which program uses tcp_wrapper
\layout Standard

Following are known:
\layout Itemize

Each service which is called by xinetd (if xinetd is compiled using tcp_wrapper
 library)
\layout Itemize

sshd (if compiled using tcp_wrapper)
\layout Subsection

Usage
\layout Standard

tcp_wrapper is controlled by two files name /etc/hosts.allow and /etc/hosts.deny.
 For more information see
\layout Code

$ man hosts.all
\layout Subsubsection

Example for /etc/hosts.allow
\layout Standard

In this file, each service which should be positive filtered (means connects
 are accepted) need a line.
\layout Code

sshd:           1.2.3.
 [3ffe:ffff:100:200::]/64
\layout Code

daytime-stream: 1.2.3.
 [3ffe:ffff:100:200::]/64
\layout Subsubsection

Example for /etc/hosts.deny
\layout Standard

This file contains all negative filter entries and should normally deny
 the rest using
\layout Code

ALL: ALL
\layout Standard

If this node is a more sensible one you can replace the standard line above
 with this one, but this can cause a DoS attack (load of mailer and spool
 directory), if too many connects were made in short time.
 Perhaps a logwatch is better for such issues.
\layout Code

ALL: ALL: spawn (echo "Attempt from %h %a to %d at `date`" 
\layout Code

 | tee -a /var/log/tcp.deny.log | mail root@localhost)
\layout Subsection

Logging
\layout Standard

Depending on the entry in the syslog daemon configuration file /etc/syslog.conf
 the tcp_wrapper logs normally into /var/log/secure.
\layout Subsubsection

Refused connection
\layout Standard

A refused connection via IPv4 to an xinetd covered daytime service produces
 a line like following example
\layout Code

Jan 2 20:40:44 gate xinetd-ipv6[12346]: FAIL: daytime-stream libwrap
\layout Code

¬ from=::ffff:1.2.3.4
\layout Code

Jan 2 20:32:06 gate xinetd-ipv6[12346]: FAIL: daytime-stream libwrap 
\layout Code

 from=3ffe:ffff:100:200::212:34ff:fe12:3456
\layout Standard

A refused connection via IPv4 to an dual-listen sshd produces a line like
 following example
\layout Code

Jan 2 20:24:17 gate sshd[12345]: refused connect from ::ffff:1.2.3.4
\layout Code

¬ (::ffff:1.2.3.4)
\layout Code

Jan 2 20:39:33 gate sshd[12345]: refused connect 
\layout Code

 from 3ffe:ffff:100:200::212:34ff:fe12:3456
\layout Code

¬ (3ffe:ffff:100:200::212:34ff:fe12:3456)
\layout Subsubsection

Permitted connection
\layout Standard

A permitted connection via IPv4 to an xinetd covered daytime service produces
 a line like following example
\layout Code

Jan 2 20:37:50 gate xinetd-ipv6[12346]: START: daytime-stream pid=0
\layout Code

¬ from=::ffff:1.2.3.4 
\layout Code

Jan 2 20:37:56 gate xinetd-ipv6[12346]: START: daytime-stream pid=0 
\layout Code

 from=3ffe:ffff:100:200::212:34ff:fe12:3456
\layout Standard

A permitted connection via IPv4 to an dual-listen sshd produces a line like
 following example
\layout Code

Jan 2 20:43:10 gate sshd[21975]: Accepted password for user from ::ffff:1.2.3.4
\layout Code

¬ port 33381 ssh2
\layout Code

Jan 2 20:42:19 gate sshd[12345]: Accepted password for user 
\layout Code

 from 3ffe:ffff:100:200::212:34ff:fe12:3456 port 33380 ssh2
\layout Chapter

Programming (using API)
\layout Standard

I have no experience in IPv6 programming, perhaps this chapter will be filled
 by others or moved away to another HOWTO.
\layout Chapter

Interoperability
\layout Standard

There are some projects around the world which checks the interoperability
 of different operating systems regarding the implementation of IPv6 features.
 Here some URLs:
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[TAHI Project]{http://www.tahi.org/}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

More coming next...
\layout Chapter


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{chapter-information}

\end_inset 

Further information and URLs
\layout Section


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{information-books}

\end_inset 

Paper printed books, articles, online reviews (mixed)
\layout Subsection

German language
\layout Itemize

Technik der IP-Netze (TCP/IP incl.
 IPv6) 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[bei Amazon.de]{http://www.amazon.de/exec/obidos/ASIN/3446215018/}

\end_inset 


\newline 
Anatol Badach, Erwin Hoffmann
\newline 
Carl Hanser Verlag München, Wien, 2001 ISBN: 3-446-21501-8 
\newline 
Kap.
 6: Protokoll IPv6 S.205-242 
\newline 
Kap.
 7: Plug&Play-Unterstützung bei IPv6 S.243-276 
\newline 
Kap.
 8: Migration zum IPv6-Einsatz S.277-294 
\newline 
Kap.
 9.3.4: RIP für das Protokoll IPv6 (RIPng) S.349-351 
\newline 
Kap.
 9.4.6: OSPF für IPv6 S.384-385
\newline 
Kommentar: tw.
 nicht ganz up-to-date bzw.
 nicht ganz fehlerfreie Abbildungen
\newline 

\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Homepage des Buches und Tabelle mit Fixes]{http://www.fehcom.de/tipn/tipn.html}

\end_inset 


\layout Itemize

Internet-Sicherheit (Browser, Firewalls und Verschlüsselung) 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[bei Amazon.de]{http://www.amazon.de/exec/obidos/ASIN/3446217258/}

\end_inset 


\newline 
Kai Fuhrberg 
\newline 
2.
 akt.
 Auflage 2000 Carl Hanser Verlag München, Wien, ISBN: 3-446-21333-3 
\newline 
Kap.2.3.1.4.
 IPv6 S.18-22 
\newline 
Kurz angerissen werden: RFC1825 - Security Association Konzept RFC1826 -
 IP authentication Header RFC1827 - IP Encapsulation Security Payload
\layout Subsection

Articles, Books, Online Reviews (mixed)
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Getting Connected with 6to4]{http://www.onlamp.com/pub/a/onlamp/2001/06/01/ipv6_tutorial.html}

\end_inset 

 by Huber Feyrer, 06/01/2001
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[How Long the Aversion to IP Version 6]{http://researchcenter.zdnet.com/data/detail?id=1001711171_237&type=RES&x=120054357}

\end_inset 

 - Review of META Group, Inc., full access needs (free) registration at META
 Group, Inc.
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[O'reilly Network search for keyword IPv6]{http://www.oreillynet.com/search/index.ncsp?sp-q=IPv6}

\end_inset 

 results in 29 hits (28.
 January 2002)
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Wireless boosting IPv6]{http://www.nwfusion.com/news/2000/1023ipv6.html}

\end_inset 

 by Carolyn Duffy Marsan, 10/23/2000
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPv6, théorie et pratique]{http://www.oreilly.fr/catalogue/ipv6.html}

\end_inset 

 (french) 2e édition, mars 1999, O'Reilly (??? no newer one available ???)
 ISBN: 2-84177-085-0
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Internetworking IPv6 with Cisco Routers]{http://www.ip6.com/index.html}

\end_inset 

 by Silvano Gai, McGrawHill Italia, 1997 13 chapters and appendix A-D are
 downloadable as PDF-documents.
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Secure and Dynamic Tunnel Broker]{http://www.vermicelli.pasta.cs.uit.no/ipv6/students/vegars/}

\end_inset 

 by Vegar Skaerven Wang, Master of Engineering Thesis in Computer Science,
 2.June 2000, Faculty of Science, Dep.of Computer Science, University of Tromso,
 Norway.
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Aufbruch in die neue Welt - IPv6 in IPv4 Netzen]{http://www.netobjectdays.org/pdf/99/stja/doering.pdf}

\end_inset 

 von Dipl.Ing.
 Ralf Döring, TU Illmenau, 1999
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Migration and Co-existence of IPv4 and IPv6 in Residential Networks]{http://www.csc.fi/~psavola/residential.html}

\end_inset 

 by Pekka Savola, CSC/FUNET, 2002
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPv6 Essentials]{http://www.sunny.ch/publications/f_ipv6.htm}

\end_inset 

 written by Silvia Hagen, July 2002, O'Reilly 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Order Number: 1258]{http://www.oreilly.com/catalog/ipv6ess/}

\end_inset 

, ISBN 0-5960-0125-8
\layout Subsection

Others
\layout Standard

See following URL for more: 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[SWITCH IPv6 Pilot / References]{http://www.switch.ch/lan/ipv6/references.html}

\end_inset 


\layout Section


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{information-onlineinformation}

\end_inset 

Online information
\layout Subsection


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{information-joinipv6}

\end_inset 

Join the IPv6 backbone
\layout Standard

More to be filled later...suggestions are welcome!
\layout Subsubsection


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{information-globalregistries}

\end_inset 

Global registries
\layout Itemize

IPv6 test backbone: 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[6bone]{http://www.6bone.net/6bone_hookup.html}

\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[How to join 6bone]{http://www.6bone.net/6bone_hookup.html}

\end_inset 


\layout Subsubsection


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{information-majorregionregistries}

\end_inset 

Major regional registries
\layout Itemize

America: 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[ARIN]{http://www.arin.net/}

\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[ARIN / registration page]{http://www.arin.net/regserv.html}

\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[ARIN / IPv6 guidelines]{http://www.arin.net/regserv/ipv6/ipv6guidelines.html}

\end_inset 


\layout Itemize

EMEA: 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Ripe NCC]{http://www.ripe.net/}

\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Ripe NCC / registration page]{http://www.ripe.net/ripencc/mem-services/registration/}

\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Ripe NCC / IPv6 registration]{http://www.ripe.net/ripencc/mem-services/registration/ipv6/ipv6.html}

\end_inset 


\layout Itemize

Asia/Pacific: 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[APNIC]{http://www.apnic.net/}

\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[APNIC / IPv6 information]{http://www.apnic.net/drafts/ipv6/}

\end_inset 


\layout Itemize

Latin America and Caribbea: 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[LACNIC]{http://lacnic.org/}

\end_inset 


\layout Itemize

Africa: 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[AfriNIC]{http://www.afrinic.org/}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Also a list of major (prefix length 35) allocations per local registry is
 available here: 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Ripe NCC / IPv6 allocations]{http://www.ripe.net/ripencc/mem-services/registration/ipv6/ipv6allocs.html}

\end_inset 

.
\layout Subsubsection


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{information-joinipv6-tunnelbrokers}

\end_inset 

Tunnel brokers
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Freenet6]{http://www.freenet6.net/}

\end_inset 

, Canada
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Hurricane Electric]{http://ipv6tb.he.net/}

\end_inset 

, US backbone
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Centro Studi e Laboratory Telecomunicazioni]{https://carmen.cselt.it/ipv6tb/}

\end_inset 

, Italy
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Wanadoo]{http://tunnel.be.wanadoo.com/}

\end_inset 

, Belgium
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[CERTNET-Nokia]{http://tb.6test.edu.cn/}

\end_inset 

, China
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Tunnelbroker Leipzig]{http://joshua.informatik.uni-leipzig.de/}

\end_inset 

, Germany - DialupUsers with dynamic IP's can get a fix IPv6 IP...
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Internet Initiative Japan]{http://www.iij.ad.jp/IPv6/index-e.html}

\end_inset 

, Japan - with IPv6 native line service and IPv6 tunneling Service
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[XS26 - "Access to Six"]{http://www.xs26.net/}

\end_inset 

, Netherland - with POPs in Slovak Republic, Czech Republic, Netherlands,
 Germany and Hungary.
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPng Netherland]{http://www.ipng.nl/}

\end_inset 

, Netherland - Intouch, SurfNet, AMS-IX, UUNet, Cistron, RIPE NCC and AT&T
 are connected at the AMS-IX.
 It is possible (there are requirements...) to get an static tunnel.
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[UNINETT]{http://www.uninett.no/testnett/index.en.html}

\end_inset 

, Norway - Pilot IPv6 Service (for Customers): tunnelbroker & address allocation
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[NTT Europe]{http://www.uk.v6.ntt.net/}

\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[NTT Euroope]{http://www.nttv6.net/}

\end_inset 

, United Kingdom - IPv6 Trial.
 IPv4 Tunnel and native IPv6 leased Line connections.
 POPs are located in London, UK Dusseldorf, Germany New Jersey, USA (East
 Coast) Cupertino, USA (West Coast) Tokyo, Japan
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[ESnet]{http://www.es.net/hypertext/welcome/pr/ipv6.html}

\end_inset 

, USA - Energy Sciences Network: Tunnel Registry & Address Delegation for
 directly connected ESnet sites and ESnet collaborators.
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[6REN]{http://www.6ren.net/}

\end_inset 

, USA - The 6ren initiative is being coordinated by the Energy Sciences
 Network (ESnet), the network for the Energy Research program of the US
 Dept.
 of Energy, located at the University of California's Lawrence Berkeley
 National Laboratory
\layout Standard

See also here for more information and URLs: 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[ipv6-net.org]{http://www.ipv6-net.de/}

\end_inset 

.
\layout Subsubsection


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{information-joinipv6-6to4-tunneling}

\end_inset 

6to4
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[NSayer's 6to4 information]{http://www.kfu.com/~nsayer/6to4/}

\end_inset 


\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[RFC 3068 / An Anycast Prefix for 6to4 Relay Routers]{http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc3068.html}

\end_inset 


\layout Subsection

Latest news
\layout Standard

More to be filled later...suggestions are welcome!
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[hs247 / IPv6 news and information]{http://hs247.com/}

\end_inset 

, also homepage for #ipv6 channel on EFnet
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[bofh.st / latest IPv6 news]{http://bofh.st/ipv6/}

\end_inset 

 (but currently [Jan 2002] outdated...), also homepage for #IPv6 channel on
 IRCnet
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[ipv6-net.org]{http://www.ipv6-net.de/}

\end_inset 

, German forum
\layout Subsection

Protocol references
\layout Subsubsection

IPv6-related Request For Comments (RFCs)
\layout Standard

Publishing the list of IPv6-related RFCs is beyond the scope of this document,
 but given URLs will lead you to such lists:
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[HS247 / IPv6 RFC list]{http://www.hs247.com/ipv6rfc.html}

\end_inset 

 (a little bit out-of-sync at the moment)
\layout Itemize

List sorted by 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPng Standardization Status]{http://playground.sun.com/pub/ipng/html/specs/standards.html}

\end_inset 

 or 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPng Current Specifications]{http://playground.sun.com/pub/ipng/html/specs/specifications.html}

\end_inset 

 by Robert Hinden
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPv6 Related Specifications]{http://www.ipv6.org/specs.html}

\end_inset 

 on IPv6.org
\layout Subsubsection

Current drafts of working groups
\layout Standard

Current (also) IPv6-related drafts can be found here:
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IP Version 6 (ipv6)]{http://www.ietf.org/ids.by.wg/ipv6.html}

\end_inset 


\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Next Generation Transitition (ngtrans)]{http://www.ietf.org/ids.by.wg/ngtrans.html}

\end_inset 


\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Dynamic Host Configuration (dhc)]{http://www.ietf.org/ids.by.wg/dhc.html}

\end_inset 


\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Domain Name System Extension (dnsext)]{http://www.ietf.org/ids.by.wg/dnsext.html}

\end_inset 


\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Mobile IP (mobileip)]{http://www.ietf.org/ids.by.wg/mobileip.html}

\end_inset 


\layout Subsubsection

Others
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Network Sorcery / IPv6, Internet Protocol version 6]{http://www.networksorcery.com/enp/protocol/ipv6.htm}

\end_inset 

, IPv6 protocol header
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[SWITCH IPv6 Pilot / References]{http://www.switch.ch/lan/ipv6/references.html}

\end_inset 

, big list of IPv6 references maintained by Simon Leinen
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Advanced Network Management Laboratory / IPv6 Address Oracle]{http://steinbeck.ucs.indiana.edu:47401/}

\end_inset 

 shows you IPv6 addresses in detail
\layout Subsection

Statistics
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPv6 routing table history]{http://www.space.net/~gert/RIPE/}

\end_inset 

 created by Gert Döring, 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Space.Net]{http://www.space.net/}

\end_inset 


\layout Subsection

More information
\layout Standard

More to be filled later...suggestions are welcome!
\layout Subsubsection

Linux related
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPv6-HowTo for Linux by Peter Bieringer]{http://www.bieringer.de/linux/IPv6/}

\end_inset 

 - Germany, and his 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Bieringer / IPv6 - software archive]{ftp://ftp.bieringer.de/pub/linux/IPv6/}

\end_inset 


\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Linux+IPv6 status by Peter Bieringer]{http://www.bieringer.de/linux/IPv6/status/IPv6+Linux-status.html}

\end_inset 

 - Germany
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[USAGI project]{http://www.linux-ipv6.org/}

\end_inset 

 - Japan, and their 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[USAGI project - software archive]{ftp://ftp.linux-ipv6.org/pub/}

\end_inset 


\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Gav's Linux IPv6 Page]{http://www.bugfactory.org/~gav/ipv6/}

\end_inset 


\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Project6 - IPv6 Networking For Linux]{http://project6.ferrara.linux.it/}

\end_inset 

 - Italy, and their 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Project6 - software archive]{ftp://ftp.ferrara.linux.it/pub/project6/}

\end_inset 


\layout Subsubsection

Linux related per distribution
\layout Description

PLD 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Polish(ed) Linux Distribution]{http://www.pld.org.pl/}

\end_inset 

 (
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

market leader
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 in containing IPv6 enabled packages)
\layout Description

Red\SpecialChar ~
Hat 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Red Hat Linux]{http://www.redhat.com/}

\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[ Pekka Savola's IPv6 packages]{http://www.netcore.fi/pekkas/linux/ipv6/}

\end_inset 


\layout Description

Debian 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Debian Linux]{http://www.debian.org/}

\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Craig Small's IPv6 information and status]{http://people.debian.org/~csmall/ipv6/}

\end_inset 


\layout Description

SuSE 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[SuSE Linux]{http://www.suse.com/}

\end_inset 


\layout Description

Mandrake 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Linux Mandrake]{http://www.linux-mandrake.com/}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

For more see the distribution status page
\layout Subsubsection

General
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPv6.org]{http://www.ipv6.org/}

\end_inset 


\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[6bone]{http://www.6bone.net/6bone_hookup.html}

\end_inset 


\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[UK IPv6 Resource Centre]{http://www.cs-ipv6.lancs.ac.uk/}

\end_inset 

 - UK
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[JOIN: IPv6 information]{http://www.join.uni-muenster.de/JOIN/ipv6/texte-englisch/informationsquellen.html}

\end_inset 

 - Germany, by the JOIN project team maintaining also 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Links to external WWW pages comprising IPv6/IPng]{http://www.join.uni-muenster.de/JOIN/ipv6/texte-englisch/www.html}

\end_inset 


\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[TIPSTER6 project]{http://tipster6.ik.bme.hu/tipster6_en.html}

\end_inset 

 - Hungary, 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

Testing Experimental IPv6 Technology and Services in Hungary
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 


\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[WIDE project]{http://www.v6.wide.ad.jp/}

\end_inset 

 - Japan
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[SWITCH IPv6 Pilot]{http://www.switch.ch/lan/ipv6/}

\end_inset 

 - Switzerland
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPv6 Corner of Hubert Feyrer]{http://www.feyrer.de/IPv6/}

\end_inset 

 - Germany
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Vermicelli Project]{http://www.vermicelli.pasta.cs.uit.no/ipv6/}

\end_inset 

 - Norway
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPv6 Forum]{http://www.ipv6forum.com/}

\end_inset 

 - a world-wide consortium of leading Internet vendors, Research & Education
 Networks...
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Playground.sun.com / IPv6 Info Page]{http://playground.sun.com/pub/ipng/html/ipng-main.html}

\end_inset 

 - maintained by Robert Hinden, Nokia
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[NASA Ames Research Center]{http://www.nas.nasa.gov/Groups/LAN/IPv6/}

\end_inset 

 (old content)
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[6INIT]{http://www.6init.com/}

\end_inset 

 - IPv6 Internet Initiative - an EU Fifth Framework Project under the IST
 Programme
\layout Standard

Something missing? Suggestions are welcome!
\layout Subsubsection

In Portuguese 
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPv6 pages of Miguel Rosa]{http://ipng.ip6.fc.ul.pt/}

\end_inset 

 
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[FCCN (National Foundation for the Scientific Computation)]{http://www.rcts.pt/ipv6/ipb6.htm}

\end_inset 


\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Grupo de Pesquisa em IPv6 do Brasil]{http://linuxgo.persogo.com.br/ipv6/}

\end_inset 

 
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[University of Algarve, Portugal]{http://www.ipv6.ualg.pt/}

\end_inset 

 
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPv6 - MFA]{http://www.ipv6.mfa.eti.br/}

\end_inset 


\layout Subsection

By countries
\layout Subsubsection

Australia
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Carl's Australian IPv6 Pages]{http://oversteer.bl.echidna.id.au/IPv6/}

\end_inset 

 (old content)
\layout Subsubsection

Belgium
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[BELNET]{http://vivaldi.belnet.be/ipv6/}

\end_inset 

 - the Belgian Research Network
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Euronet]{http://www.ipv6.euronet.be/}

\end_inset 

 - one of the biggest ISP's of Belgium...
\layout Subsubsection

Germany
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Completel IPv6 information]{http://www.v6bone.de/}

\end_inset 

, German ISP
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPv6-net.org]{http://www.ipv6-net.de/}

\end_inset 

, German IPv6 forum
\layout Subsubsection

France
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Renater]{http://www.renater.fr/Projets/IPv6/index.htm}

\end_inset 

 - Renater IPv6 Project Page
\layout Subsubsection

Italy
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Edisontel]{http://www.6bone.it/}

\end_inset 

 - IPv6 Portal of Edisontel
\layout Subsubsection

Japan
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Yamaha IPv6]{http://www.rtpro.yamaha.co.jp/RT/ipv6/}

\end_inset 

 (sorry, all in japanese native ...)
\layout Subsubsection

Korea
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPv6 Forum Korea]{http://www.ipv6.or.kr/english/index.new.htm}

\end_inset 

 - Korean IPv6 Deployment Project
\layout Subsubsection

Mexico
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPv6 Mexico]{http://www.ipv6.unam.mx/}

\end_inset 

 (spain & english version) - IPv6 Project Hompeage of The National Autonomous
 University of Mexico (UNAM)
\layout Subsubsection

Netherland
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[SURFnet]{http://www.ipv6.surfnet.nl/}

\end_inset 

 - SURFnet IPv6 Backbone
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[STACK]{http://www.stack.nl/}

\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[STACK (IPv6)]{http://www.ipv6.stack.nl/ipv6/}

\end_inset 

 - Students' computer association of the Eindhoven University of Technology,
 Netherland.
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPng.nl]{http://www.ipng.nl/}

\end_inset 

, collaboration between WiseGuys and Intouch.
\layout Subsubsection

United Kingdom
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[British Telecom IPv6 Home]{http://www.bt.com/ipv6/}

\end_inset 

 - BT's ISP IPv6 Trial, UK's first IPv6 Internet Exchange etc.
\layout Subsection

By operating systems
\layout Subsubsection

Cisco IOS
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Cisco IOS IPv6 Entry Page]{http://www.cisco.com/warp/public/732/Tech/ipv6/}

\end_inset 


\layout Subsubsection

Compaq 
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPv6 at Compaq]{http://www.compaq.com/ipv6/}

\end_inset 

 - Presentations, White Papers, Documentation...
\layout Subsubsection

Microsoft
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Microsoft Windows 2000 IPv6]{http://www.microsoft.com/windows2000/technologies/communications/ipv6/default.asp}

\end_inset 

 
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[MSRIPv6]{http://www.research.microsoft.com/msripv6}

\end_inset 

 - Microsoft Research Network - IPv6 Homepage 
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Getting Started with the Microsoft IPv6 Technology Preview for Windows 2000]{http://msdn.microsoft.com/downloads/sdks/platform/tpipv6/start.asp}

\end_inset 


\layout Subsubsection

*BSD
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[KAME project]{http://www.kame.net/}

\end_inset 

 - Japan, (*BSD)
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[NetBSD's IPv6 Networking FAQ]{http://www.netbsd.org/Documentation/network/ipv6/}

\end_inset 


\layout Subsubsection

Solaris
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Sun Microsystems IPv6 Page for Solaris 8]{http://www.sun.com/solaris/ipv6/}

\end_inset 


\layout Subsubsection

Sumitoma 
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Sumitomo Electric has implemented IPv6 on Suminet 3700 family routers]{http://www.sumitomo.com/htmls/randd/ipv6/ipv6.html}

\end_inset 


\layout Subsection

Application lists
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPv6.org / IPv6 enabled applications]{http://www.ipv6.org/v6-apps.html}

\end_inset 


\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Freshmeat / IPv6 search]{http://freshmeat.net/search/?q=IPv6}

\end_inset 

, currently (02.
 May 2002) 51 projects
\layout Subsubsection

Analyzer tools
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Ethereal]{http://ethereal.planetmirror.com/}

\end_inset 

 - Ethereal is a free network protocol analyzer for Unix and Windows
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Radcom RC100-WL]{http://www.ip6.com/us/analyzer.htm}

\end_inset 

 - Download Radcom RC100-WL protocol analyzer version 3.20
\layout Section


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{information-onlinetesttools}

\end_inset 

Online test tools
\layout Standard

More to be filled later...suggestions are welcome!
\layout Itemize

finger, nslookup, ping, traceroute, whois: 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[UK IPv6 Resource Centre / The test page]{http://www.cs-ipv6.lancs.ac.uk/ipv6/testing/}

\end_inset 


\layout Itemize

ping, traceroute, tracepath, 6bone registry, DNS: 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[JOIN / Testtools]{http://www.join.uni-muenster.de/lab/testtools.html}

\end_inset 

 (German language only, but should be no problem for non German speakers)
\layout Itemize

traceroute6, whois: 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[IPng.nl]{http://www.ipng.nl/}

\end_inset 


\layout Section


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{information-maillists}

\end_inset 

Maillists
\layout Standard


\begin_inset  Tabular
<lyxtabular version="3" rows="14" columns="6">
<features>
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" width="0pt">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" width="0pt">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" width="0pt">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" width="0pt">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" width="0pt">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" rightline="true" width="0pt">
<row topline="true" bottomline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Focus
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Request e-mail address
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

What to subscribe
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Maillist e-mail address
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Language
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Access through WWW
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Linux kernel networking including IPv6
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

majordomo (at) oss.sgi.com
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

netdev
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

netdev (at) oss.sgi.com
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

English
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Archive]{http://oss.sgi.com/projects/netdev/archive/}

\end_inset 


\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Linux and IPv6 in general (1)
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

majordomo (at) list.f00f.org
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

linux-ipv6
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

linux-ipv6 (at) list.f00f.org (moderated)
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

English
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Linux implementation of the IPv6 protocol
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Web-based, see URL
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

project6 (at) ferrara.linux.it
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

English
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Info]{http://project6.ferrara.linux.it/sections/lists.html}

\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Subscription]{http://mailman.ferrara.linux.it/listinfo/project6}

\end_inset 


\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Mobile IP(v6) for Linux
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

majordomo (at) list.mipl.mediapoli.com
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

mipl
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

mipl (at) list.mipl.mediapoli.com
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

English
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Info]{http://www.mipl.mediapoli.com/mailinglist.html}

\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Archive]{http://www.mipl.mediapoli.com/mail-archive/}

\end_inset 


\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Linux IPv6 users using USAGI extension
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

usagi-users-ctl (at) linux-ipv6.org
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

usagi-users (at) linux-ipv6.org
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

English
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Info / Search]{http://www.linux-ipv6.org/ml/index.html#usagi-users}

\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Archive]{http://www.linux-ipv6.org/ml/usagi-users/}

\end_inset 


\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

IPv6 on Debian Linux
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Web-based, see URL
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

debian-ipv6 (at) lists.debian.org
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

English
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Info/Subscription/Archive]{http://lists.debian.org/debian-ipv6/}

\end_inset 


\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

IPv6/6bone in Germany
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

majordomo (at) atlan.uni-muenster.de
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

ipv6
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

ipv6 (at) uni-muenster.de
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

German/English
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Info]{http://www.join.uni-muenster.de/JOIN/ipv6/texte-englisch/mailingliste.html}

\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Archive]{http://www.join.uni-muenster.de/local/majordomo/ipv6/}

\end_inset 


\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

6bone
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

majordomo (at) isi.edu
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

6bone
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

6bone (at) isi.edu
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

English
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Info]{http://www.6bone.net/6bone_email.html}

\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Threaded archive]{http://ryouko.dgim.crc.ca/ipv6/}

\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Mirror of archive]{http://www.wcug.wwu.edu/lists/6bone/}

\end_inset 


\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

IPv6 discussions
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

majordomo (at) sunroof.eng.sun.com
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

ipng
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

ipng (at) sunroof.eng.sun.com
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

English
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Info]{http://playground.sun.com/pub/ipng/html/instructions.html}

\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Archive]{ftp://playground.sun.com/pub/ipng/mail-archive/}

\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Mirror of archive]{http://www.wcug.wwu.edu/lists/ipng/}

\end_inset 


\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

IPv6 users in general
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

majordomo (at) ipv6.org
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

users
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

users (at) ipv6.org
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

English
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Info]{http://www.ipv6.org/mailing-lists.html}

\end_inset 


\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Bugtracking of Internet applications (2)
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

bugtraq-subscribe (at) securityfocus.com
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

bugtraq (at) securityfocus.com (moderated)
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

English
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Info]{http://online.securityfocus.com/popups/forums/bugtraq/intro.shtml}

\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Archive]{http://online.securityfocus.com/archive/1}

\end_inset 


\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

IPv6 in general
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Web-based, see URL
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

ipv6 (at) ipng.nl
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

English
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Info/Subscription]{http://mailman.ipng.nl/mailman/listinfo/ipv6/}

\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Archive]{http://mailman.ipng.nl/pipermail/ipv6/}

\end_inset 


\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true" bottomline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

majordomo (at) mfa.eti.br
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

majordomo (at) mfa.eti.br
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

ipv6
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

ipv6 (at) mfa.eti.br
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Portuguese
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard


\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[Info]{http://www.mfa.eti.br/listas.html}

\end_inset 


\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
</lyxtabular>

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

(1) recommended for common Linux & IPv6 issues.
\layout Standard

(2) very recommended if you provide server applications.
\layout Standard

Something missing? Suggestions are welcome!
\layout Standard

Another list is available at 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[JOIN Project / List of IPv6-related maillists]{http://www.join.uni-muenster.de/JOIN/ipv6/texte-englisch/ipv6.infoquellen.html}

\end_inset 

.
\layout Chapter

Revision history / Credits / The End
\layout Section


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{revision-history}

\end_inset 

Revision history
\layout Standard

Versions x.y are published on the Internet.
\layout Standard

Versions x.y.z are work-in-progress and only published as LyX file on CVS.
\layout Subsection

Releases 0.x
\layout Description

0.32 2002-11-03/PB: Add information about Chinese translation
\layout Description

0.31.1 2002-10-06/PB: Add another maillist
\layout Description

0.31 2002-09-29/PB: Extend information in proc-filesystem entries
\layout Description

0.30 2002-09-27/PB: Add some maillists
\layout Description

0.29 2002-09-18/PB: Update statement about nmap (triggered by Fyodor)
\layout Description

0.28.1 2002-09-16/PB: Add note about ping6 to multicast addresses, add some
 labels
\layout Description

0.28 2002-08-17/PB: Fix broken LDP/CVS links, add info about Polish translation,
 add URL of the IPv6 Address Oracle
\layout Description

0.27 2002-08-10/PB: Some minor updates
\layout Description

0.26.2 2002-07-15/PB: Add information neighbor discovery, split of firewalling
 (got some updates) and security into extra chapters
\layout Description

0.26.1 2002-07-13/PB: Update nmap/IPv6 information
\layout Description

0.26 2002-07-13/PB: Fill /proc-filesystem chapter, update DNS information
 about depricated A6/DNAME, change P-t-P tunnel setup to use of 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

ip
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 only
\layout Description

0.25.2 2002-07-11/PB: Minor spelling fixes
\layout Description

0.25.1 2002-06-23/PB: Minor spelling and other fixes
\layout Description

0.25 2002-05-16/PB: Cosmetic fix for 2\i \^{ }
128, thanks to José Abílio Oliveira
 Matos for help with LyX
\layout Description

0.24 2002-05-02/PB: Add entries in URL list, minor spelling fixes
\layout Description

0.23 2002-03-27/PB: Add entries in URL list and at maillists, add a label
 and minor information about IPv6 on RHL
\layout Description

0.22 2002-03-04/PB: Add info about 6to4 support in kernel series 2.2.x and
 add an entry in URL list and at maillists
\layout Description

0.21 2002-02-26/PB: Migrate next grammar checks submitted by John Ronan 
\layout Description

0.20.4 2002-02-21/PB: Migrate more grammar checks submitted by John Ronan,
 add some additional hints at DNS section 
\layout Description

0.20.3 2002-02-12/PB: Migrate a minor grammar check patch submitted by John
 Ronan
\layout Description

0.20.2 2002-02-05/PB: Add mipl to maillist table
\layout Description

0.20.1 2002-01-31/PB: Add a hint how to generate 6to4 addresses
\layout Description

0.20 2002-01-30/PB: Add a hint about default route problem, some minor updates
\layout Description

0.19.2 2002-01-29/PB: Add many new URLs
\layout Description

0.19.1 2002-01-27/PB: Add some forgotten URLs
\layout Description

0.19 2002-01-25/PB: Add two German books, fix quote entinities in exported
 SGML code
\layout Description

0.18.2 2002-01-23/PB: Add a FAQ on the program chapter
\layout Description

0.18.1 2002-01-23/PB: Move 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

the end
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 to the end, add USAGI to maillists
\layout Description

0.18 2002-01-22/PB: Fix bugs in explanation of multicast address types
\layout Description

0.17.2 2002-01-22/PB: Cosmetic fix double existing text in history (at 0.16),
 move all credits to the end of the document
\layout Description

0.17.1 2002-01-20/PB: Add a reference, fix URL text in online-test-tools
\layout Description

0.17 2002-01-19/PB: Add some forgotten information and URLs about global
 IPv6 addresses
\layout Description

0.16 2002-01-19/PB: Minor fixes, remove 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

bold
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

emphasize
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 formats on code lines, fix 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

too long unwrapped code lines
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 using selfmade utility, extend list of URLs.
\layout Description

0.15 2002-01-15/PB: Fix bug in addresstype/anycast, move content related
 credits to end of document
\layout Description

0.14 2002-01-14/PB: Minor review at all, new chapter 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

debugging
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

, review 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

addresses
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

, spell checking, grammar checking (from beginning to 3.4.1) by Martin Krafft,
 add tcpdump examples, copy firewalling/netfilter6 from IPv6+Linux-HowTo,
 minor enhancements
\layout Description

0.13 2002-01-05/PB: Add example BIND9/host, move revision history to end
 of document, minor extensions
\layout Description

0.12 2002-01-03/PB: Merge review of David Ranch
\layout Description

0.11 2002-01-02/PB: Spell checking and merge review of Pekka Savola
\layout Description

0.10 2002-01-02/PB: First public release of chapter 1
\layout Section


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{credits}

\end_inset 

Credits
\layout Standard

The quickest way to be added to this nice list is to send bug fixes, corrections
, and/or updates to me ;-).
\layout Standard

If you want to do a major review, you can use the native LyX file (see 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref[original source]{general-original-source}

\end_inset 

) and send diffs against it, because diffs against SGML don't help too much.
\layout Subsection


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{major-credits}

\end_inset 

Major credits
\layout Itemize

David Ranch <dranch at trinnet dot net>: For encouraging me to write this
 HOWTO, his editorial comments on the first few revisions, and his contributions
 to various IPv6 testing results on my IPv6 web site.
 Also for his major reviews and suggestions.
\layout Itemize

Pekka Savola <pekkas at netcore dot fi>: For major reviews, input and suggestion
s.
\layout Itemize

Martin F.
 Krafft <madduck at madduck dot net>: For grammar checks and general reviewing
 of the document.
\layout Itemize

John Ronan <j0n at tssg dot wit dot ie>: For grammar checks.
\layout Subsection

Other credits
\layout Subsubsection

Document technique related
\layout Standard

Writing a LDP HOWTO as a newbie (in LyX and exporting this to DocBook to
 conform to SGML) isn't as easy as some people say.
 There are some strange pitfalls...
 Nevertheless, thanks to:
\layout Itemize

Authors of the 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[LDP Author Guide]{http://www.linuxdoc.org/LDP/LDP-Author-Guide/}

\end_inset 


\layout Itemize

B.
 Guillon: For his 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url[DocBook with LyX HOWTO]{http://perso.libertysurf.fr/bgu/doc/db4lyx/}

\end_inset 


\layout Subsubsection


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{content-related-credits}

\end_inset 

Content related credits
\layout Standard

Credits for fixes and hints are listed here, will grow sure in the future
\layout Itemize

S .P.
 Meenakshi <meena at cs dot iitm dot ernet dot in>: For a hint using a 
\begin_inset Quotes sld
\end_inset 

send mail
\begin_inset Quotes srd
\end_inset 

 shell program on tcp_wrapper/hosts.deny
\layout Itemize

Georg Käfer <gkaefer at salzburg dot co dot at>: For detection of no proper
 PDF creation (fixed now by LDP maintainer Greg Ferguson), input for German
 books, big list of URLs and some other suggestions
\layout Itemize

Frank Dinies <FrankDinies at web dot de>: For a bugfix on IPv6 address explanati
on
\layout Itemize

John Freed <jfreed at linux-mag dot com>: For finding a bug in in IPv6 multicast
 address explanation
\layout Itemize

Craig Rodrigues <crodrigu at bbn dot com>: For suggestion about RHL IPv6
 setup
\layout Itemize

Fyodor <fyodor at insecure dot org>: Note me about outdated nmap information
\layout Section

The End
\layout Standard

Thanks for reading.
 Hope it helps!
\layout Standard

If you have any questions, subscribe to proper 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref[maillist]{information-maillists}

\end_inset 

 and describe your problem.
\the_end
