=head1 NAME

B<texi2db> - convert Texinfo documents into DocBook XML.

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<texi2db> [I<OPTION>] [I<FILE>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<texi2db> converts a Texinfo into DocBook XML.

By default it reads from STDIN and writes to STDOUT. However, if given a
filename, it will read that file, and an output filename can also be
specified as a command-line option.

=head1 OPTIONS

B<-i>, B<--include> HTML|INFO|TEX include the specified text.

B<-f>, B<--file> I<FILE> read from file rather than STDIN.

B<-o>, B<--output-to> I<FILE> write to file rather than STDOUT.

B<-l>, B<--log-to> I<FILE> write status messages to file rather than STDOUT.

B<-L>, B<--runon> set runon line limit (default=20)

B<-v>, B<--verbose> show diagnostic output. Use twice for lots of detail. Use thrice for insane amounts of detail.

B<-e>, B<--max-errors> I<MAX> abort after this many errors. Default is 1. use '--max-errors 0' to disable.

B<-h>, B<--help> show this usage message and exit.

B<-V>, B<--version> show the program version and exit.

=head1 BUGS

Bugs are tracked along with Lampadas bugs in the Gnome Bugzilla
repository.
If you report a bug in B<texi2db>, specify lampadas as the product
and texi2db as the component, so it will be routed the appropriate person.
You can do this quickly by visiting the following URL:

http://bugzilla.gnome.org/enter_bug.cgi?product=lampadas&component=texi2db


=head1 NOTES

B<texi2db> was developed as a project of the Linux Documentation Project.
While it is useful on its own, it is part of Lampadas, the LDP's document
production system.

=head1 SEE ALSO

See the home page of the Linux Documentation Project,
http://www.tldp.org for updates and more information.

=head1 AUTHOR

This man page was written by David Merrill, david -AT- lupercalia.net.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under
the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1 or any later
version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no Invariant Sections,
no Front-Cover Texts and no Back-Cover Texts.

=cut

